abandon (uh BAN dn) vt.
1. to give up something forever; 2. to leave in a time of danger
• Abandon all hope of seeing your family again. • We must abandon the boathouse until the storm is over.
[-ed, -ing, abandonment n.] [Syn. quit, desert, forsake (Each of these has a slightly different emotion attached to it.)]
abbreviate (uh BREE vee ayt) vt.
to shorten something by leaving a part, or parts, out
• We might abbreviate this word abbrev. • The student abbreviated most of the words in his or her class notes to keep up with the teacher’s lecture.
[-d, abbreviating, abbreviation n.]
ability (uh BIL etee) n.
1. being able; having power to do something; 2. skill, expertise, power
• You have the ability to succeed at what you attempt. • Einstein had exceptional mathematical ability. • An automobile lacks the ablility to pull a freight train.
abridge (uh BRIJ) vt.
1. to reduce in scope; 2. to shorten while maintaining the essence
• Condensed books abridge the original to appeal to a less than scholarly audience. • The 9-hour Lord of the Rings trilogy was abridged to 1 1/2 hours for its television broadcast.
[-d, abridging]
abscond (ab SKAHND) vi.
to run away and hide; especially to avoid capture by law enforcers
• Jesse James absconded just ahead of the sheriff. • To abscond often results in a false sense of security.
[-ed, -ing, absconder n.]
absolve (ab ZAHLV) vt.
1. to declare free from guilt; 2. to free from duty or a promise
• The Lord absolved the sinner and forgave him. • The jury absolved the accused of any wrongdoing. • Dad absolved Junior of his promise to wash the car.
[-d, absolving, absolver n.] [Syn. pardon, forgive, acquit
absorb (ab ZAWRB) vt.
1. to suck up; 2. to take up the full energy or attention of; engross; 3. to take in and incorporate; 4. to assume the full cost
• The sponge absorbed the entire spill. • Learning fractions absorbed Hailee’s full attention. • If we fail to absorb the lessons of history, we are doomed to repeat them. • I’ll absorb the charge for the window replacement.
[-ed, -ing, absorbant adj.]
abstain (ab STAYN) vi.
to hold back (from); refrain from
• I shall abstain from smoking or drinking. • Three voted for the bill, two against it, and one abstained.
[-ed, -ing, abstention n.] abstract (ab STRAKT for adj., AB strakt for n., v.) adj. 1. not concrete; thought of apart from any material object; 2. not easily understood —n. a brief statement of the content of a book, court case, article, etc.; a summary —vt. to remove or take away; to summarize • I had an abstract idea of what he meant, but nothing solid. • Frankie’s ideas were too abstract to fully comprehend. • We knew about the case from having read the abstract. • Abstract the story, stating only the relevant facts. [-ed, -ing, abstraction n., abstractly adv.]
absurd (ab SOERD or ab ZOEHRD) adj.
1. so obviously untrue as to be laughable; 2. laughably different from what is reasonable
• The story that his arms were tired because he had just flown in from Los Angeles was absurd. • The outfit that Gino wore with the red and white striped shirt and the green and yellow checked pants was absurd.
[absurdly adv., absurdity n.]
accentuate (ak SEN choo ayt) vt.
1. to pronounce or mark with a stress or accent; 2. emphasize
• When you tell people about your vacation, accentuate the high points and play down the low points. • Wear clothing that accentuates your youthful looks.
[-d, accentuating, accentuation n.]
acceptable (ak SEPT ibl) adj.
adequate; tolerable; bearable; okay
• Eating peas at a restaurant using only your knife is not considered acceptable manners. • Dressing in a toga is considered acceptable at certain fraternity parties
acceptance (ak SEP tins) n.
1. being accepted; 2. an approval
• Jack’s acceptance by Jill’s family made him very happy. • Ian’s acceptance of full responsibility for the telephone charges got Kira off the hook (so to speak).
access (AK ses) n.
1. the act of coming near to; approach; 2. a way of approaching something; 3. the right to enter or use something —vt. to gain or have use of a database
• The access to the house was through the side door. • Sebastian gained access to his car through the driver’s window.
[-ed, -ing]
accommodate (uh KOM uh dayt) vt.
1. to make fit; to adapt; adjust; 2. to reconcile; 3. to do a service or favor for; 4. to have room for
• An adapter is needed for your sink to accommodate the dishwasher hose. • Even though I don’t want to do it, I’ll accommodate you. • The hotel accommodates its guests with room service. • The kitchen accommodates seating space for four.
[-d, accommodating
accommodation (uh kom uh DAY shun) n.
1. adjustment; adaptation to a certain use; 2. reconciliation of differences; 3. a convenience; 4. living or traveling space
• Myles made an accommodation to staying up all night and annoying his parents by sleeping most of the day. • The employee and his former boss reached an accommodation over the matter of severance pay. • Having coffeemakers in each room was an accommodation for motel guests. • The train’s compartment had sleeping accommodations for up to four passengers.
accomplice (uh KOM plis) n.
a person who knowingly assists in committing a crime; partner in crime
• While Bob was robbing the bank, his accomplice, Louise, was behind the wheel of the getaway car.
[Syn. associate]
accomplish (uh KOM plish) vt.
1. to do or succeed in doing; 2. to perfect; to complete
• Rocio accomplished her task of bathing the dog. • The human fly never failed to accomplish its mission.
[-ed, -ing, accomplishment n.] [Syn. perform, reach]
accord (uk AWRD) vt.
1. to make agree; to reconcile; 2. to grant or concede —vi. mutual agreement —n. 1. an informal agreement, as between two states or countries; 2. consent; permission
• Our objectives are in accord. • I intend to accord you every courtesy. • Jakob had his dad’s accord to use the family car.
[-ed, -ing, (in) accordance n.]
accost (uh KAWST) vt.
to approach and greet first (often in an intrusive way)
• I wouldn’t be so bold as to accost someone who did not greet me first. • I was walking along, minding my own business, when I was accosted by a street peddler.
[-ed, -ing]
account (uh KOWNT) vt.
to tell, consider, or judge —vi. 1. to furnish a reckoning of money collected and/or payed out; 2. to make acceptable amends for; 3. to give acceptible reasons for —n. 1. a counting or calculation; 2. a record of monetary funds; 3. a bank account; 4. a record of transactions
• The detective asked Jim to account for his time on Sunday. • The cashier had to account for her daily receipts. • The criminal must account for his or her evil action. • Karen accounts for her funds in her checkbook register. • There’s no accounting for people’s tastes. • Jason keeps track of what is due to him in his accounts receivable ledger.
[-ed, -ing, accountable n.
accuracy (AK yur isee) n.
the quality of being correct or exact; exactness, preciseness
• Weather forecasts are not renowned for their accuracy. • Robin Hood could shoot an arrow with great accuracy.
accurate (AK yur it) adj.
1. careful and precise; 2. free from errors; 3. sticking closely to a standard (like a scale)
• Ian made an accurate drawing of his pet pug Willis. • Sarah had to be accurate in math to get a grade of 100%. • Making candy requires a very accurate thermometer.
[accurately adv.] [Syn. precise]
achieve (uh CHEEV) vt.
1. to succeed in doing; 2. to get somewhere; to attain; to gain —vi. to succeed
• Franklin Roosevelt achieved election to the U.S. presidency four separate times. • It is difficult to achieve the lead in the Tour de France bicycle race. • When Hillary tried to climb Everest, the goal was his to achieve.
[-d, achieving, achievement n.] [Syn. reach, perform
acknowledge (ak NAH lidzh) vt.
1. to admit to be true; confess; 2. to recognize the claims or authority of; 3. to answer a greeter, respond to an introduction, etc.; 4. to express thanks for; 5. to affirm the reception of something
• Roxane acknowledged the charges against her. • The insuror acknowledged the claims of the victim. • The chair acknowledges the senator from Neverland. • I’d like to acknowledge both my parents for the gift of life.
[-d, acknowledging, acknowledgment n.]
acquire (ak WYR) vt.
1. to gain or get something; 2. to take possession of; obtain
• You would do well to acquire a good education. • We all acquire some of our parents’ traits by heredity. • The United States acquired the Louisiana Territory by purchasing it from France. • An appreciation for caviar is an acquired taste, unlike a love for creamed corn, which is, of course, innate.
[-d, acquiring] acquisition* (AK wuh zi shuhn) n. something or someone obtained • A developer’s acquisition of the old Bethlehem Corp.’s property is seen as a good thing for Easton. • Tania’s acquisition of a new PDA made her very happy. • Ali’s acquisition of a new chauffeur pleased her to no end. [acquisitive adj., acquisitively adv., acquisitiveness n.]
acrimony (AK ruh moh nee) n.
bitterness, sharpness, or harshness of speech, manner, or temper
• The acrimony of the temper of a scorned woman is legendary both in literature and in life. • Dylan greeted the news that his new DVD player did not work at all with considerable acrimony in his oaths.
[acrimonious adj., acrimoniously adv.] [Syn. asperity]
acute (uh KYOOT) adj.
1. sharply pointed; 2. shrewd; quick of mind; 3. sensitive to something (like acute hearing); 4. severe and sharp (like acute pain); 5. serious; severe
• An acute angle forms a sharp point. • Geoffrey’s acute mind made short work of the crossword. • The eagle’s acute eyesight can pick up a mouse on the ground from hundreds of meters in the air. • Certain pains, like John, are acute but of short duration. • There is an acute shortage of labor in some job categories.
[-ly adv., acuity n.] [Syn. sharp, keen, critical] adapt* (uh DAPT) vt. 1. to make suitable or to make fit by changing; 2. to change oneself to fit new or changed conditions • Jim thought it perfectly sensible to adapt his gas stove’s IN line to connect to the hot water line from his sink. • When Mary travels between Miami and Juneau, she adapts her wardrobe— especially outerwear—accordingly. [-ed, -ing, -able adj., -ation, -er, adaptability n.
adept (uh DEPT) adj.
very skilled, expert —n. a person who is very skilled in some field of endeavor or knowledge
• George Jetson will be a very adept widget maker. • When it comes to guarding those Academy Award winners, the accounting firm of Price Waterhouse has shown itself to be adept.
[adeptly adv., adeptness n.] [Syn. expert] adhere* (ad HEER) vi. 1. to stick to something; stick to a plan; 2. to stay firm in support of a leader or a plan • Peanut butter will adhere to one’s teeth almost every time. • The candidate adhered to her promise to support the health plan, even after she was elected. • The secretary adhered to his boss’s story, even after the latter had changed it. [-d, adhering, adherer, adherence n.] [Syn. stick]
adjudicate (uh JOO dik ayt) vt.
to hear and decide a court case —vi. to serve as a judge to decide some dispute or problem
• Judge Judy adjudicates cases on television five days a week. • Melissa agreed to adjudicate a dispute between two of her neighbors on how high to construct a fence between their backyards.
[-d, adjudicating]
admirable (AD muh ruh bl) adj.
inspiring or deserving admiration or praise; excellent; splendid
• Melissa’s success in totally renovating the house with limited available resources is admirable. • The varsity hockey team did an admirable job defending against their opponent’s star shooter. • The orchestra performed admirably at last night’s concert.
[admirably adv.]
admire (ad MYR) vt.
1. to look upon with approval, wonder, and delight; 2. to have a high regard for
• Any basketball fan has to admire the effortlessness with which Jason Kidd dishes the rock to his teammates. • Students of the Korean police action of the 1950s admire General MacArthur’s daring in landing his troops and equipment behind the enemy lines at Inchon.
[-d, admiring, admiration n.]
adorn (uh DAWRN) vt.
1. to be ornamental to; add beauty or distinction to; 2. put decorations on; ornament
• Many ornaments are hung on a Christmas tree to adorn it. • Jewelry often adorns a woman’s arms and neck. • In summer, a house’s lawn is often adorned by colorful flowers.
[-ed, -ing, adornment n.] [Syn. beautify, decorate, bedeck
adulate (AD joo let) vt.
1. to praise too highly or flatter in a servile manner; 2. to admire to an excessive degree
• In the king’s presence, his subjects often adulate him. • Ali always adulates her husband Joe when she’s looking to get him to do something for her.
[-d, adulating, adulation, adulator n., adulatory adj.]
advantageous (AD van TAY juhss) adj.
resulting in having an advantage; profitable; favorable
• The outbreak of war in Europe was quite advantageous for American industry. • Because they get to bat last, the home team in a baseball game is in an advantageous position. adversarial* (AD voer SER ee uhl) adj. of or characterized by disagreement, opposition, hostility, etc. (as would be the case between adversaries) • A prosecutor and a defense attorney have an adversarial relationship—at least while they are in court. • During the U.S. Civil War, the Union and the Confederacy were adversarial.
adversary (AD vuhr SER ee) n.
a person who fights against another; one who is in opposition to something
• Muhammad Ali was Joe Frasier’s adversary in the boxing ring on three separate occasions. • The New York Yankees and the Boston Red Sox are legendary adversaries in baseball’s American League. • In World War II, the U.S.’s Pacific adversary was Japan.
[Syn. enemy, opponent
adversity (ad VER si tee) n.
a state of poverty and trouble; a condition of misfortune or wretchedness; an instance of calamity
• Those who lived through the Great Depression of the early 1930s learned how to triumph over adversity. • The only solution to the adversity of those living in the Dust Bowl of Oklahoma in the 1930s was to move away. • The Japanese automobile and electronics industries helped the country to recover from the adversity of defeat.
aerate (AER ayt) vt.
1. to open to air or to cause air to circulate through; 2. to get oxygen to the blood (as in respiration); 3. to charge a liquid with gas (such as making soda pop)
• To improve the taste of drinking water, huge plants aerate it before it is sent to your home. • Your lungs aerate the blood that is brought there from your heart as part of your pulmonary circulation. • Soft drink makers aerate their drinks by forcing carbon dioxide to dissolve under pressure.
[-d, aerating, aeration n.] aesthetic* (es the tik) adj. 1. of beauty; 2. sensitive to art and beauty; demonstrating good taste; being artistic • Van Gogh’s Starry Night has an aesthetic quality that defies being expressed in words. • Aaron was touched by the aesthetic arrangement of the flowers blooming in the garden. [aesthetically adv., aesthetical, aesthete n.]
affect (uh FEKT) vt.
1. to influence; to produce a change; 2. to move or cause an emotional response; 3. to pretend to be, have, feel, or like —n. an emotional response; an emotion or feeling attached to an idea
• Both crosswind and current affect our ability to row straight across to the other side of the river. • Seeing the photos of the liberated concentration camp inmates affects many people. • As the voice of Shrek, Mike Meyers affects the role of a lovable green ogre.
[-ed, -ing, affectable adj.] [Syn. assume (sense 3)]
affront (uhf RUHNT) vt.
1. to openly or purposefully insult; offend; slight; 2. to confront in a defiant manner —n. an open or deliberate insult
• Don’t affront Bill’s mother by telling her the chicken she prepared tasted like the take-out chicken’s bucket. • When you tell your parents you’ll do anything you want regardless of what they think, you affront them. • Debbie’s not inviting Sally to her birthday party was a deliberate affront.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. offend]agenda* (uh JEN duh) n. a list of things to be done; especially, a program of things to be done at a meeting • Jason wanted to settle down and have children, but his brother Dylan had a totally different agenda. • “Old Business” was the second thing on the agenda for the meeting, just after the reading of the minutes from the last meeting.
agile (A juhl) adj.
1. able to move quickly and easily; deft and active of body or mind; 2. keen and lively (of mind)
• The ballerina showed how agile she was as she effortlessly danced and frolicked about the stage. • The comedian was agile of mind as he moved from one quip seamlessly to the next.
[agilely adv., agility n.]
agrarian (uhg RAR ee uhn) adj.
1. relating to land in general; 2. relating to farms, farmers, and agriculture
• The agrarian laws of the late twentieth century had the government paying farmers to not grow certain crops. • Agrarian schools teach farmers about crop rotation and how alternating certain crops replenishes soil nutrients
agreement (uh GREE mnt) n.
1. being in harmony or accord; 2. an understanding between two parties; 3. a contract
• Tania and Ali came to an agreement on who’d bring what to the Cinco de Mayo party. • Canada and the U.S. have an agreement concerning the openness of their shared border. • Calling a strike would violate the union’s agreement with the automaker.
ailment (AYL mnt) n.
disease; illness; any mental or physical disorder, especially a mild but persistent one
• Marley walked with a limp as a result of a bout with rickets, an ailment that had affected him as a puppy. • Delusions of grandeur describes an ailment that afflicts many teenaged boys.
alacrity (uh LAK ri tee) n.
eager readiness or willingness, usually demonstrated by quick and lively action
• Consuela ate her dinner with alacrity, eager to leave to go to the movie theater. • Willis wagged his tail rapidly indicating his alacrity to go for a walk when he heard Jim getting his leash.
alchemy (AL ku mee) n.
1. an early combination of magic, chemistry, and philosophy from the Middle Ages, the main purposes of which were to turn base metals into gold and to find the elixir for eternal youth; 2. a process or power for turning one thing into a better thing as if by miraculous means
• Four-year-old Francesco was positive that his grandfather could practice alchemy to change his pennies into quarters. • Anyone who believes that a cottage sitting on a quarter acre of land can be turned into a mansion believes in the teachings of alchemy.
[alchemical adj., alchemically adv., alchemist n.]
alienate (AY lee en ayt) vt.
1. to transfer land ownership to another; 2. to estrange; make unfriendly; 3. to cause to be detached or withdrawn; 4. to cause a change of affection
• That to sell a piece of property to another is to alienate it is a rarely used meaning of the word in the U.S. • When you ask a friend’s former girlfriend for a date, you’re likely to alienate that friend. Ask a friend’s current boyfriend for a date and you’re certain to alienate her. • Snatching a dog’s food from his mouth is likely to alienate the dog—especially if it’s not your own pet. • Sally told Suzie stories about Cheryl’s past dealings with her friends that were sure to alienate Suzie from Cheryl and, she hoped, gain Suzie’s friendship for herself.
[-d, alienation n.]ally* (uh LY for vt., A ly for n.) vt. 1. to unite or join with for a certain purpose; 2. to relate by similarity of purpose, structure, or other character —n. 1. a country, group, or individual joined with others for a common end; 2. plants or animals closely related by some characteristic • A marriage was often used to ally two royal European families during the Middle Ages and beyond. • The U.K. was our ally in both wars with Iraq. • The lilly and the onion are two closely allied bulbs. [allied, allying, allies pl., alliance n.] [Syn. associate]
alter (AWL ter) vt.
1. to cause to change in detail but not in substance; modify; 2. to take parts of a garment and resew them for a better fit; 3. to neuter (an animal) —vi. to change; become different
• Mike and Alice altered their plans for the evening. • The tailor had to alter the gown to make it fit Jan better. • Alter your pet to keep down an overpopulation of strays. • The Fab Five altered Al’s style of dress and his lifestyle.
[-ed, -ing, alteration n.] [Syn. change, vary]
although (awl THOH) conj.
despite the fact that; granting that; though
• Mike sat down to dinner, although he had eaten less than a half hour before. • Although Mary claimed to not care for opera, she had to admit that the music from Il Trovatore was exceptional.
altruism (AL troo i zm) n.
unselfish concern for others’ well-being
• It had to be altruism as well as bravery that caused Maria to run into the burning house to rescue the crying child. • It is uncommon to see a case of pure altruism, where there is no thought of personal gain.
[altruist n.] [Syn. selflessness] ambiguous* (am BIG yoo uhs) adj. 1. having more than one possible meaning; 2. unclear; vague; indefinite • The third base coach’s ambiguous signals left the batter not knowing whether to swing away or bunt. • Roxane was ambiguous in her instructions for feeding the cat while she was away. [-ly adv., -ness, ambiguity n., ambiguities pl.] [Syn. obscure]
ambivalence (am BIV uh lens) n.
having conflicting feelings about a person or thing at the same time, such as love and hate
• Karen had a real ambivalence about being invited to Uncle Bob’s cabin; she loved visiting but hated the four-hour trip. • David showed ambivalence about serving artichokes because, while they are delicious, they’re a pain to prepare.
amenity (uh MEN i tee) n.
1. pleasing quality; attractiveness; 2. a pleasant or desirable feature; something that adds to one’s comfort —pl. the courteous manners and pleasant acts of polite social behavior
• The tropical scenery is only one amenity of Hawaii. • Hawaii’s climate is an additional amenity of the place. • The restaurant’s servers and hostesses demonstrated all the amenities one would expect at those prices.
[amenities pl.
amicable (AM i kuh bl) adj.
feeling friendly; demonstrating goodwill; peaceable
• Alice and her husband Ted had an amicable discussion about putting in a flower garden in the spring. • Bob and Carol separated on amicable terms.
[amicably adv., amicability n.] among (uh MUHNG) prep. 1. In the midst of; surrounded by; included in a group of; 2. from place to place in; 3. in the number or group of; 4. by or with a lot of • You are among friends. • He passed among the crowd. • Ralph is included among the supporters of the president. • Machiavelli’s work is popular among business executives
amorphous (uh MAWR fuhs) adj.
1. lacking definite form; shapeless; 2. of no specific type; anomolous; 3. indefinite; vague
• Sulfur is a yellow, nonmetallic element that is found in crystal and amorphous forms. • To one unfamiliar with the game of rugby, the game appears to be governed by amorphous rules. • When Gino tried to pin Hailee down to a specific time, all he could get from her was an amorphous response.
[amorphously adv.]
amphibian (am FIB ee en) n.
1. any one of a class of cold-blooded vertebrates without scales (including frogs, newts, salamanders, and toads) that starts life with gills, living in the water, and later develops lungs; 2. any plant or animal that is at home both on land and in water; 3. any aircraft or vehicle that can operate on land and in water
• It is not unusual to find amphibians in and around a pond. • The early Pan American Airways Clippers were amphibians that loaded and unloaded their passengers on land but took off from and landed on water.
[amphibious adj.] amplify* (AMP li fy) vt. 1. to make bigger and stronger; increase or extend (power, authority, etc.); 2. to strengthen by adding details, examples, etc.; 3. (electronics) to strengthen an audio signal or electrical current • Caesar Augustus amplified the reach of the Roman Empire. • The robbery victim amplified his story by providing the license plate number of the felon’s car and a thorough description of his height, build, and clothing. • The sound of the lead singer’s voice is almost inaudible, but the sound engineer will amplify it to make it stand out. [amplified, amplifying, amplification, amplifier n.]
amusement (uh MYOOZ mnt) n.
1. the condition of being entertained; 2. a thing or activity that amuses or entertains; entertainment
• Randy’s amusement was Claire’s main occupation. • Marcia played solitaire for her own amusement. • The antics of the dancing bears was a source of great amusement for the audience.
amusing (uh MYOOZ eeng) adj.
1. entertaining; diverting; 2. causing laughter or merriment
• The comedian’s stand-up routine was very amusing. • An amusing incident takes one’s mind off his or her woes. • Jose’s amusing facial contortions made everyone laugh.
[Syn. funny
anachronism (un AK ron i zm) n.
1. the putting forth of something as having happened outside its appropriate time, especially earlier; 2. anything that seems to be out of its proper time frame in history
• The depiction in some movies of people interacting with dinosaurs is an often-portrayed anachronism. • Anachronism is a frequently used tool of literature because it allows all sorts of interactions that would be otherwise impossible. • Having a conversation with the founding fathers or interviewing Abe Lincoln or Marie Curie are but three literary uses for anachronism.
[anachronistic adj., anachronistically adv.]
analogy (uh NAL uh gee) n.
1. a likeness in some ways between things that are otherwise not alike; 2. the likening of one thing to another based on some shared similarity
• There is an analogy between polar bears and humans, in that both are mammals and both live on earth. • Mork’s analogy convinced Mindy that her problem closely resembled the one Curtis had last month; the circumstances were the same although the names and locations differed.
[analogous adj., analogously adv.] [Syn. likeness] analysis* (uh NA lis is) n. 1. breaking up or separating a whole into its parts so that they can be inspected to determine their nature, proportions, functions, etc.; any detailed inspection; 2. a statement of the results of this process • The statement is undergoing detailed analysis to determine its true meaning. • The specimen was sent to the laboratory for analysis. • The historian’s analysis of the spaghetti company’s battle for supremacy is available in his latest book, Pasta for You.
analytical (an uh LIT ik uhl) adj.
1. something that separates into constituent parts; 2. skilled at using analysis
• Greg’s analytical mind breaks each problem into tiny parts and carefully examines each and every one. • The more one practices analytical procedures, the more skilled at them he or she is likely to become.
[analytic, analytically adv.] [Antonym: synthetic]
analyze (AN i LYZ) vt.
1. to separate into constituent parts so as to determine their nature, proportion, interrelationship, etc.; 2. to examine in detail to find out the nature, tendencies, etc. of something; 3. to psychoanalyze
• Heat is often very handy as a tool to help analyze the composition of substances, because once vaporized the substances’ unique light spectra can be recorded. • A microscope is a useful tool to analyze things that are invisible to the naked eye. • Some people need analyzing by a shrink.
[-d, analyzing, analyzer n.
anarchy (AN er kee) n.
1. a complete lack of government; 2. characterized by political disorder and violence; lawlessness; 3. disorder in any area of activity or endeavor
• With no government in power, anarchy reigned supreme. • In the current state of anarchy, looting and violence were the everyday state of affairs. • With no proven theory as to the mechanism of the Copelia virus, anarchy prevailed in the field of viral research.
[anarchic, anarchical adj., anarchist n., anarchically adv.]
ancestor (AN ses toer) n.
1. someone from whom one is descended, especially one earlier than a grandparent; forefather; forebear; 2. an earlier kind of animal from which later types have evolved; 3. anything regarded as a forerunner of a thing that developed later
• My neighbor Bryan claims that Davey Crockett was his ancestor. • The sabertooth tiger is thought to be an ancestor of today’s big cats as well as domesticated cats. • The British Morris Mini is considered the ancestor of all modern compact cars with sideways-mounted engines.
[ancestral adj.
ancient (AYN shent) adj.
1. belonging to the distant past, especially prior to the end of the Western Roman Empire (476 A.D.); 2. having been in existence a long time; very, very old; 3. antiquated; old-fashioned —n. 1. a person who lived in ancient times; 2. a very old person
• In ancient days, Athens and Sparta were great city-states. • Baltimore’s Fort McHenry is an ancient structure. • Barbara thinks her mom’s notions of proper behavior are totally ancient, dude. • Julius Caesar was an ancient; so is my grandfather.
[Syn. old]
ancillary (AN sil er ee) adj.
1. underling or subordinate, often used with to; 2. that serves as an aid; auxiliary
• On the Minnow, Gilligan was ancillary to the Skipper. • While the main body of a news article imparts primary information, sidebars usually contain ancillary or related facts.
anecdote (AN ik doht) n.
1. a short, entertaining account of something that happened, usually personal or biographical; 2. (obsolete) a little-known amusing fact
• Jonah related the anecdote about himself and the whale. • Many are unaware of the fact that some social studies books once contained the anecdote that Abraham Lincoln was born in a log cabin that he’d built with his own hands.
[anecdotal adj., anecdotally adv.] [Syn. story]
animate (AN i mayt) vt.
1. to bring to life; to give life to; 2. to cause to be energetic or spirited; 3. to move to action; inspire
• Skillful puppeteers are able to convincingly animate lifeless, wooden, marionettes. • You can rely on Harold to join in a dull discussion and, by so doing, to immediately animate it. • The group of soldiers sat around acting glum, until Sergeant Jones animated them to take action.
[-d, animating, animation n.] antagonist* (an TAG uh nisst) n. 1. a person who competes against or opposes another; adversary; opponent; 2. a muscle, drug, etc. that acts to opppose another • The Boston Red Sox baseball team is the chief antagonist of the New York Yankees baseball team. • For every muscle in your body that causes a body part to move in a certain direction, an antagonist muscle exists to return the part to its original position. [-ic adj., -ically adv., antagonism n.] [Syn. opponent
anthology (an THOL i jee) n.
a collection of short stories, songs, poems, excerpts, etc. compiled into a single book
• Every poetry collection is an anthology if more than a single poet’s works are included. • Almost every CD of popular music is an anthology of songs.
[-logies pl., -logize vt., -logizer, -logist n., -logistic adj.]
antiquated (an tik WAY tid) adj.
1. no longer useful or used; obsolete; out of date; old fashioned; 2. very aged
• A very small part of this book was typed on an antiquated IBM Selectric typewriter—a very small part. • I usually drive an antiquated Toyota from the mid-1980s.
[antiquate vt.] [Syn. old]
antiseptic (AN ti SEP tik) adj.
1. disallowing infection, decay, etc. by slowing the growth of microbes; 2. free from infectious agents or infection; 3. very clean; sterile; 4. untouched by life’s problems, emotions, etc. —n. a cleaning agent meant to prevent the growth of bacteria and viruses
• When you get a cut, it’s a good idea to use an antiseptic cream to prevent its becoming infected. • An operating room should be in antiseptic condition. • You need not keep your room antiseptic; just neat will do. • The hermit led an antiseptic life, locked away in his penthouse apartment with no contact with the outside.
[-ally adv.]
anxiety (ang ZY i tee) n.
1. a state of uneasiness, apprehension, or worriedness about what the future might hold; 2. feeling powerless and unprepared to deal with threatening (usually imaginary) events; 3. an eager but often uneasy concern (to do well)
• Karen always felt anxiety about her investments in the stock market and was nervous about losing money. • Lou’s biggest anxiety concerned earthquakes, which was especially unusual because he lived in New York City. • Anxiety hung heavily in the air of the SAT exam room.
[anxieties pl.] [Syn. care]
apathetic (AP uh THET ik) adj.
1. feeling emotionless; unmoved; 2. disinterested; listless
• That most Americans were apathetic to the election was evidenced by the very low turnout. • Football fans are rarely apathetic to the fortunes of their home teams; they yell and cheer for them, even on TV.
[-ally adv., apathy n.] [Syn. impassive
appalling (uh PAWL ing) adj.
creating horror, shock, or dismay
• The children’s lack of attention while crossing the busy street was absolutely appalling. • An appallingly large number of the general public have no notion of what March Madness means.
[-ly adv., appall vt. (appalled)] [Syn. dismaying]
apparent (uh PAR int) adj.
1. easily seen; visible; 2. readily understood or perceived; obvious; evident; 3. seeming (but not necessarily) true
• Your coat’s location is apparent; I can see it on the rack. • It was clearly apparent that when the judge decided the case, she did not have all the information. • Ian has an apparent knowledge of the stock, but I don’t think you should buy it until the research has been completed.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. evident]
appearance (uh PEER enss) n.
1. a coming forth or becoming visible; 2. the outward look or aspect of a person or thing; 3. any thing or person seen; 4. an outward pretense; 5. how things seem to be (but are not necessarily)
• She made an appearance at the Oscar presentations. • Gina’s appearance was one of calm and stateliness. • The groundhog’s appearance was ever so brief, and it soon disappeared back into its burrow. • Though only of middling means, Genghis and Sylvia Kahn liked to keep up an appearance of being well off. • From all appearances, he’s innocent
appreciate (uh PREE shee AYT) vt.
1. to think well of; to understand or enjoy; esteem; 2. to recognize and be thankful for; 3. to estimate the quality or value of (especially favorably); 4. to be sensitively aware of; 5. to increase the price or value of
• We all appreciate how well mannered Shewana is. • Many of her students appreciate the educational experience Mrs. Sheridan provides in her applied physics class. • The connoisseur appreciated the fineness of the woodwork. • The college entrance committee fully appreciates all the applicants’ concern for its ethnic and racial blindness. • The price of fine art continues to appreciate even as you are reading this sentence.
[-d, appreciating, appreciation n.] [Syn. treasure, cherish, pride]
approach (uh PROHch) vt.
1. to come close or closer to; 2. to be similar to; to approximate; 3. a proposal or request to; to make advances; 4. to start dealing with
• You may approach the rim of the Grand Canyon, but don’t approach it too closely—for obvious reasons. • Digital audiotape approaches the quality of CD sound. • Do you have the nerve to approach your boss for a raise? • It’s time to approach the matter of clearing the flood waters’ debris out of the basement.
[-es pl., -ed, -ing, -able adj., -ability n. (also approach n.)] appropriate (uh PROH pree AYT for v., uh PROH pree it for adj.) vt. 1. to take for one’s exclusive use; 2. to take without permission or improperly; 3. to set aside for a certain use or particular person —adj. right for the purpose; suitable; fit; proper • The Duchess has been known to appropriate the entire seating area of a town’s only restaurant when she desires to have tea. • Jane’s mother overruled Jane’s attempt to appropriate her neighbor’s lawn chair. • Farmer Jack had to appropriate the horse to draw the sleigh—at least until the snowmobile was fixed. • A bathing suit is appropriate for the swimming pool but not at all appropriate for the igloo. [-d, appropriating, -ness, appropriation n.] [Syn. fit]
aquarium (uh KWAER ee uhm) n.
1. a tank, usually having glass sides, or a pool, bowl, etc. for keeping live water plants, fish, and/or aquatic mammals; 2. a building used to put such collections on exhibit
• Margie had tropical fish in the 20-gallon aquarium that she kept against a wall of the living room. • The National Aquarium in Baltimore, Maryland, is a major tourist attraction in that city’s inner harbor
arable (AR i bl) adj.
appropriate for plowing and, therefore, for growing crops —n. cultivatable land
• A farm is only as useful as its arable land. • Thomas bought the field on the basis of its arability.
[arability n.]
arbitration (AHR bit RA shn) n.
the act of settling a dispute by a person or group picked to hear both sides and make a decision [arbitrator n. the person(s) who so decide(s)]
• Jackie’s dispute with the cable company was settled by binding arbitration, meaning that the arbitrator’s decision was final and had to be abided by. • Nonbinding arbitration is more like advice after a fair hearing because neither party has to follow that advice.
arboreal (ahr BAWR ee uhl) adj.
1. having to do with trees; 2. living in trees or adapted to living in trees
• A tropical rain forest is an arboreal habitat—full of trees. • Certain monkeys and sloths are arboreal and spend their entire lives in the trees, while squirrels are equally at home on the ground and out on a limb.
architect (AHRK i tekt) n.
1. a person whose job is to design and draw up plans for buildings, bridges, etc.; 2. any similar designer in a specific field; 3. a planner or creator
• Frank Lloyd Wright’s architecture is impressively displayed in New York City’s Guggenheim Museum of Art, where visitors begin at the top and walk continuously downhill. • Perhaps our most celebrated naval architect was Admiral Hyman Rickover, the father of the nuclear submarine. • The men who wrote the U.S. Constitution were the architects of American democracy.
arena (uh REE nuh) n.
1. The central part of an ancient Roman amphitheater, where gladators fought and shows were put on; 2. an area used for sporting and other events, usually surrounded by rows of seats; the building containing same; 3. any area of struggle or conflict
• In the arenas of Rome, gladiators’ swords often clashed. • Basketball is the most frequent conflict in today’s sports arenas, like the Staples Center or Madison Square Garden. • Both candidates rolled up their sleeves and joined combat in the political arena, just two weeks before election day
argument (AHR gyoo mint) n.
1. a reason or reasons offered for doing or not doing something; 2. the putting forth of such reasons; 3. a discussion containing disagreement; debate; dispute
• The argument for preserving our natural resources is that they are irreplaceable and in many cases unrenewable. • Randi might make the argument that iced drinks, drunk too fast, make you feel like they’re freezing your brain. • The candidates had an argument about the pros and cons of trying to eat French toast through a straw. arid* (AR id) adj. 1. absent enough water for things to grow; dry; barren; 2. dull; lifeless; of no interest • Most of Nevada is arid desert, despite the Colorado River. • Moesha’s social life is as arid as a mouthful of unsalted, fat-free tortilla chips.
[-ness, -ity n., -ly adv.] [Syn. dry]
aristocratic (uh RIS tuh KRAT ik) adj.
1. of, characteristic of, or favoring rule by an elite group as a form of government; 2. of the upper class or nobility; 3. like a member of the upper class or nobility in manner and/or taste or carrying oneself (used favorably, as proud, distinguished, etc. or unfavorably as snobbish, haughty, etc.)
• During the French Revolution, aristocratic government was rejected by the revolutionaries, but it wasn’t long until Napoleon changed all that. • The aristocratic class in England sits in the House of Lords. • William was much admired for his aristocratic demeanor. • Elaine’s aristocratic manner was loathed by most, who felt she was looking down her blue-blooded nose at them.
[aristocratically adv.
arrogant (AR uh gnt) adj.
full of or due to undeserved pride and selfimportance; overbearing; haughty
• The entertainer in the lounge seemed very arrogant for one who was not even close to being a headliner. • The arrogant bearing of the heavyweight champion was justly rewarded when he was knocked out in round one.
[-ly adv., arrogance n.] [Syn. proud]
artist (AHRT ist) n.
1. a person who is skilled in or works in the techniques of fine arts, especially in drawing, painting, sculpture, etc.; 2. someone who does anything very well, imaginatively, and with a feeling for form, effect, etc.; 3. one in any of the performing arts (dance, theater, etc.)
• When asked how he’d managed to sculpt Muhammad Ali so realistically, the artist replied, “I used Cassius clay.” • Mark Twain was an artist with the spoken and written word. • The Beatles were the most prolific recording artists of their day.
artistic (ahr TIS tik) adj.
1. of or by art or artist(s); 2. skillful and tasteful; aesthetically satisfying; 3. sensitive to artistic values
• Life in Tahiti was romanticized by the artistic touch of Paul Gaugin’s paintings of the islanders’ customs. • Van Gogh’s Sunflowers is very artistic, with a balanced composition that is very pleasing to the eye. • Picasso’s revulsion by the Spanish Civil War comes through in his artistic antiwar statement, Guernica.
[-ally adv.]
artwork (AHRT woerk) n.
a single work of art, or works of art, collectively
• Leonardo daVinci’s Mona Lisa is an artwork that has withstood the test of time. • If you get to Paris, don’t miss the opportunity to check out the magnificent artwork that’s housed in the Louvre.
ascetic (uh SET ik) adj.
self-denying; austere —n. 1. a person who lives a life of rigorous self-denial for whatever purpose; 2. anyone living with strict self-discipline and renouncing the usual comforts and pleasures
• Gandhi led an ascetic life, permitting himself few comforts. • The ascetic refused to buy chairs with any kind of cushions or padding, lest he be thought of as pampering himself.
[-ally adv., -ism n.] [Syn. severe]
ascribe (uhs KRYB) vt.
1. to credit to or blame something on a specific cause, event, person, etc.; 2. to regard something as being the work of or belonging to someone
• The falling of nuclear power plants into mistrust and disrepute is ascribed to events at Chernobyl in the USSR. • The Iliad and The Odyssey are epics that were passed down over the centuries as part of oral tradition, until they were finally written down and ascribed to Homer.
[-d, ascribing]aspect (AS pekt) ) n. 1. how a person appears or looks; 2. how something looks from a specific point of view; 3. any of the numerous ways in which a problem, idea, etc. can be looked at; 4. a certain part or quality; element; 5. a side facing in a certain direction • Linda’s aspect is bright, cheery, and happy-go-lucky. • As viewed from my aspect, the writings of Geoffrey Chaucer are rather oldfashioned and stilted. • In deciding whether to build a new water main, the problem must be viewed from the aspect of the contractor as well as that of the eventual consumer. • How well a chess player uses his or her knights is just one aspect of the game. • The northern aspect of Glenn’s house never got sunlight. assert* (uh SOERT) vt. 1. to declare; affirm; to state positively; 2. to defend or maintain (rights, claims, etc.); 3. to insist • Harold had to assert that he was actually himself rather than the culprit who had stolen his identity. • You must assert your right to vote by registering and then by showing up to cast your vote on election day. • When summoned to court, Dolores asserted her right to be represented by counsel. • Rodrigo asserted his innocence. [-ed, -ing, -ion n.]
assess (uh SES) vt.
1. to estimate the value of something (for example, property) for the purpose of taxing it; 2. to set the amount of (a tax, a fine, damages, etc.); 3. to impose a fine, tax, etc.; 4. to estimate or determine the significance, importance, or worth of something; to evaluate
• The city assesses each lot and its improvements to determine what the property owner must pay to city hall. • For being late in paying her parking ticket, the judge assessed Eleanor a penalty of $40. • The town decided to assess a 1% sales tax on top of the 6% already charged by the state. • For purposes of insurance, the appraiser assessed the painting’s value at $1,200 to $1,500.
[-ed, -ing, -ment n.
assiduous (uh SID yoo uhss) adj.
1. gone about with constant and careful attention; 2. industrious; persevering
• Nuclear submarines must be built by assiduous workers. • To learn algebra well, you must be assiduous in doing your homework assignments. • The difference between a mediocre potter and an exceptional craftsman is that the latter is assiduous.
[-ly adv., -ness n.] [Syn. busy]
assist (uh SIST) vt.
1. to aid; give help to; 2. to work as a helper —n. helping someone to do something
• Dawn likes to assist her parents with the laundry; she dirties it. • Freddie assists at the school library by reshelving returns. • May I give you an assist with starting your car?
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. help]associate (uh SOH shee ayt for vt., uh soh SHEE it for n. and adj.) vt. 1. to connect; combine; join together; 2. to bring a person into a relationship (friendship, partnership, etc.); 3. to connect mentally —n. 1. somebody with whom one is connected, such as a partner, friend, fellow worker, etc.; 2. a member of some group, firm, society, etc. with less than full status; 3. anything joined to some other thing —adj. 1. joined with others in some kind of work; 2. of less than full status; 3. connected; accompanying • Barry and Bob have chosen to associate and form The Killer Bees—a company that will make buzzers. • For their advertising needs, The Killer Bees have decided to associate with Bell Star and Associates. • I often associate peanut butter with jelly; don’t you? • The non–chief justices of the U.S. Supreme Court are associate justices. • Betty and Veronica are associates in a certain comic book. • Jim earned an associate degree from County College. • Barry is a sales associate at a major appliance store. [-d, -ciating]
assume (uh SOOM or uh SYOOM) vt.
1. to put on or take on the appearance, job, form, etc. of; 2. to grab; usurp; 3. to personally undertake; 4. to take for granted; 5. to feign; pretend to have
• When Jodi put on the costume, she assumed the appearance of a humansized mouse. • After a coup, Napoleon assumed the power to rule France. • Marty will assume the task of providing refreshments. • I assumed that Geri had bought tickets, and I was wrong. • You may assume the role of the nuclear scientist, even though you failed to pass arithmetic.
[-d, assuming]
assumption (uh SUHMP shn) n.
1. (religious) the taking up of a person into heaven; a Roman Catholic holiday celebrating the Virgin Mary’s being taken up; 2. a taking upon one’s self, taking over, or taking up; an assuming; 3. anything taken for granted; a supposing
• The Feast of the Assumption is a Roman Catholic holiday. • The First Bank just completed the assumption of Harry and Peter’s mortgage loan, so from now on, the monthly checks should be made out to First Bank. • Napoleon’s assumption of the title of emperor gave the rest of Europe something to be concerned about. • The assumption that you were going to get a B or better in chemistry does not appear to have been well founded. astute (ast OOT, ast YOOT) adj. being clever or shrewd of mind; cunning; crafty; wily • Getting out of the dot.com stocks just before they crashed was an astute move on Jerry’s part. • A fox is a very astute animal, often referred to as cunning. • If Hal were astute, he’d pick up on Lynn’s hint to call her.
[-ly adv., -ness n.] [Syn. shrewd
athlete (ATH leet) n.
someone trained in exercises, games, or contests requiring physical strength, speed, skill, stamina, etc.
• It takes a trained athlete to perform on the parallel bars. • Tammy proved her ability as an athlete when she ran the 100-meter sprint in less than 11 seconds.
[athletic adj., athletically adv.]
attain (uh TAYN) vt.
1. to gain; accomplish; achieve; 2. to reach or come to; arrive at
• Sherry worked very hard to attain a B+ average. • It took Lillian and Bob the better part of two days’ worth of climbing to attain the peak of Mount Hood.
[-ed, -ing, -able adj., -ability n.] [Syn. reach]
attention (uh TEN shn) n.
1. the act of keeping one’s mind on something or the ability to do that; concentration; mental readiness for such concentration; 2. observation or notice; 3. care or consideration; 4. thoughtfulness for the needs of others; courtesy; 5. the military command to come to erect posture
• Debbie had to pay attention to navigate the treacherous winding road. • Mike’s attention wasn’t always on his work. • Farah’s smile caught Todd’s attention. • This matter will receive our immediate attention. • Smart congressmen always pay careful attention to the needs of their constituents. • The sergeant barked the order to come to attention.
attitude (AT i tood) n.
1. the position or posture assumed by the body in connection with an action, feeling, mood, etc.; 2. a manner of acting, thinking, or feeling that shows one’s disposition, opinion, etc.; 3. one’s disposition, opinion, mental set, etc.; 4. the position of an air- or spacecraft with respect to a given line or plane, such as the horizon
• Victor assumed a humble attitude as he prayed. • Phyllis made it clear that she was not impressed by Wilma’s haughty attitude of self-righteousness. • The coach was impressed by Joe’s positive attitude. • The plane’s attitude changed as it banked 45° to port.
[attitudinal adj.] [Syn. posture] attribute (at TRIB yoot for vt., AT rib YOOT for n.) vt. 1. to think of as belonging to, produced by, resulting from, or originating in; assign; ascribe to; 2. assign as a characteristic or quality —n. 1. a characteristic or quality of a person or thing; 2. a thing in art or literature used as a symbol for a person, office, etc. • Scholars attribute many sonnets to Shakespeare without having any real evidence that he wrote them. • The motion picture Gentle Ben attributes the quality of gentleness to a bear. • The attribute of winged sandals is often used to represent the Greek god Hermes, or Roman Mercury. [-d, attributing, attributable adj., attribution n.] [Syn. ascribe, quality]
atypical (ay TIP i kl) adj.
not usual; not characteristic; abnormal
• Failing to run away when people came near was atypical behavior on the part of the raccoon. • It was atypical for Ryan to display poor manners.
[(also atypic), -ly adv.] audacious* (aw DAY shuhs) adj. 1. bold or daring; fearless; 2. not restrained by a feeling of shame or impropriety; rudely bold; brazen • Severely outnumbered, the platoon’s audacious attack caught the enemy by surprise. • After Sonya had had one drink too many, her audacious behavior toward the host got her ejected from the party. [-ness n., -ly adv.] [Syn. bold]
audience (AW dee ens) n.
1. a group of people assembled to see and hear a speaker, play, concert, etc.; 2. everybody who is tuned in to a particular TV or radio show; 3. everybody who hears what one says or who reads what one writes; one’s public; 4. a chance to have one’s ideas heard; 5. a formal interview with a person in a high position
• The audience completely filled the theater to see Aida. • The Superbowl always draws a large TV audience. • Stephen King has a ready audience for whatever he writes. • The TV networks all gave the candidates an audience so that the public might hear their positions. • Very few are fortunate enough to get an audience with the president of the United States.augment* (awg MENT) vt. to increase in quantity, strength, size, etc.; enlarge —vi. to become larger; increase • Sam worked nights to augment his income. • The chili’s heat was augmented by adding canned jalapenos.
[-ed, -ing, -ation n.]
authentic (awth EN tik) adj.
1. trustworthy; believable; reliable; 2. real; in fact; genuine; 3. legally executed, as a deed
• The news report from the Middle East seemed authentic. • That is an authentic diamond ring that Jill is wearing. • The raised seal on the document proves that it’s authentic.
[-ally adv.]
authenticate (awth EN tik AYT) vt.
1. to valididate or make authentic; 2. to verify; establish the truth of; 3. to prove to be real, genuine, or as represented or advertised
• The immigration agent authenticated the passport with a raised seal. • The painting was authenticated by the art expert to be an actual work of Lambrou Mourioti. • The maker’s hallmark on the silver vase was used to authenticate it as having been made around 1870.
[-d, authenticating, authentication n.] [Syn. confirm]
avarice (A voer is) n.
greed; too great a desire for wealth
• Many pirates were driven by avarice. • Avarice drives certain CEOs to cheat their stockholders.
[avaricious adj., avariciously adv., avariciousness n.]
aversion (uh VER zhin) n.
1. an intense or decided dislike; repugnance; 2. whatever is causing that dislike
• Many children have an aversion to seeing a doctor for shots. • Barry, who had a fear of heights, was made to go to high places as a form of aversion therapy.
avoid (uh VOYD) vt.
1. to stay away from; evade; shun; 2. to not let happen; 3. to turn away from
• As part of her weight-loss diet, Maria tries to avoid people who are eating as well as commercials for food. • Driving carefully helps to avoid accidents. • Being shy, Vance tries to avoid the eyes of others.
[-able adj., -ably adv.] [Syn. escape]
aware (uh WAER) adj.
realizing or knowing; informed; conscious
• Fran was well aware of the No Parking sign. • Bill was not aware that he kept clicking his teeth together. • Maribel was made aware of the restriction on eating peas by picking them up with one’s knife.
[-ness n.
awe (AW) n.
a mixed feeling of fear, respect, and wonder brought on by something majestic, sacred, sublime, etc.
• The first time Ron saw Mt. Kilamanjaro, he was filled with awe. • Ruth stood in awe of her older brother David, the rocket scientist
barricade (BAR I kayd) n.
1. a defense barrier hastily thrown up, as in street fighting; 2. any obstacle or barrier —vt. to keep out or in by use of a barrier; to obstruct
• Police put up barricades to keep the crowd off the parade route. • Barricades consisting of piled-up rubble were used for defense by soldiers in the cities of post–D-day Europe during World War II. • The people of Stalingrad barricaded the streets to keep out the invading Germans.
[-d, barricading]
barter (BAHR toer) vi.
to trade goods or services without the use of money —vt. to swap goods or services in return for other goods and services; trade —n. 1. the act of swapping; 2. anything swapped
• In colonial days it was common for settlers to barter knives and hatchets to Native Americans for beaver pelts. • Barter that hat for two pairs of socks and a Hershey bar. • Al and Frank often do business by barter. • This hat cost me nothing; I got it from Alice by barter.
[-ed, -ing, -er n.]
basic (BAY sik) adj.
1. of or at the beginning; fundamental; essential; 2. making or being a support or introduction; elementary
• A basic course in weaving might be helpful to rug makers. • A knowledge of mathematics is basic to learning physics. • Honesty is a basic principle to live by.
basis (BAY sis) n.
1. the start, foundation, or main support of anything; 2. the main ingredient of anything; 3. the underlying philosophy; 4. a timed plan or procedure; 5. a certain attitude
• “What is the basis for your accusing me of eating on the job?” Gail asked, quickly swallowing what was in her mouth. • That all men are created equal is the basis of the U.S. Constitution. • We pay for cable TV on a monthly basis. • Mark and Louise are on a friendly basis these days.
battle (BA tl) n.
1. a fight—as that between armed units on the sea, land, or in the air; 2. war or armed combat; fighting; 3. any conflict or fight —vt. to oppose; fight —vi. 1. to participate in a fight or struggle; 2. to fight
• One of the most intense battles in the Pacific during WWII was for the island of Iwo Jima. • There was a street battle between two rival gangs. • The landlord and tenant had an ongoing battle over upkeep. • Nemo’s father battled the move to expel him from school. • Geoffrey was in the battle for human rights in El Salvador. • Oscar de la Hoya and Ray Mancini were in a real ring battle.
[-d, battling
behalf (be HAF) n.
on (or in) behalf of; in the interest of; speaking for; representing
• Harriet spoke in behalf of the truth’s being known. • The lawyer appeared on behalf of his client, Mr. Jones.
behavior (be HAYV yoer) n.
1. how anybody acts; conduct; deportment; 2. any organism’s reaction to stimulus—especially a recordable response; 3. noticeable actions or responses of any person, animal, or machine
• Nora’s behavior seemed perfectly normal to Dennis. • Juanita thought Ted’s behavior to be rather strange when she saw him hit his finger with a hammer and laugh. • Amy was disturbed by her car engine’s rough behavior.
being (BEE eeng) n.
1. existing or living; life; existence; 2. basic or essential nature; 3. someone or thing that is alive or exists; 4. all the qualities, physical and mental, that make up a person; personality
• Any living thing is in a state of being. • Any plant or animal can be thought of as a being. • Very few people acknowedge a fly as a being, but it is one. • Most religions believe in the existence of a Higher Being.
belie (bee LY) vt.
1. to disguise; misrepresent; 2. to disappoint or leave unfulfilled; 3. to prove false or show to be untrue
• Al’s good-natured smile belies his evil intentions. • Sally hated to belie her customer by telling her the cake she had ordered was not yet ready. • It is a debunker’s job to belie the tricks of charlatans.
[-d, belying]
belief (bee LEEF) n.
1. a conviction that some things are true or real; 2. faith, especially in a religious sense; 3. confidence in; trust in; 4. something accepted as true; 5. an opinion; an expectation; a judgment
• Geoffrey’s belief that there is a tooth fairy is based on a chapter from his book of bedtime stories. • Maribel’s beliefs are between her and her pastor—and are none of our business. • Valerie had complete belief in Harper’s honesty. • It was her belief that Santa would show up later. • Your accomplishments are totally beyond belief. belligerent* (bel IDG oer ent) adj. 1. at war; 2. relating to war; of fighting; 3. showing an eagerness to fight; spoiling for a fight • During World War I, the belligerents engaged in four years of unmoving trench warfare. • The belligerent adversaries duked it out in the ring. • Veronica’s attitude was always belligerent, as if she were seeking to get into an argument.
[belligerently adv.] [Syn. bellicose
beneficial (BEN e FISH uhl) adj.
1. to the advantage of; helpful; 2. getting benefit; 3. in one’s best interest
• Mary’s friendship turned out to be beneficial to Evelyn around holiday time. • Having auto insurance proved quite beneficial for Tania when a reckless driver ignored the stop sign and hit her car. • It is beneficial for you to have an individual retirement plan.
[-ly adv.]
benefit (BEN e fit) n.
1. a helpful, charitable act; 2. an advantage; a gain —vt. to help; aid —vi. to gain; to profit from
• The singer sang at a benefit to raise money for the group. • The cab waited an additional 10 minutes for Bob’s benefit. • My singing publicly benefited the business of all ear doctors in the neighborhood. • A playwright benefits from each performance of her play.
[-ed, -ing]
berate (be RAYT) vt.
to scold or strongly rebuke (with wagging finger)
• Don’t berate me for acting the way you act. • Audrey berated Robert for driving after having had a drink.
[-d, berating] [Syn. scold
bereft (bi REFT) adj.
1. without; devoid (of); deprived; 2. bereaved
• For his crime, the criminal was bereft of his freedom. • The crime victim was bereft of her feeling of security. • The bereft twins mourned the death of their uncle.
betray (bit RAY) vt.
1. to aid the enemy, or make vulnerable to the enemy in a traitorous way; 2. to break faith with; to not act up to expectations; 3. to deceive; 4. to give away secret information
• Benedict Arnold betrayed his defenses to the British. • Bill went to the broker so as not to betray Anne’s faith in his ability to get tickets for Cats. • Nan got Sue to join the team, convincing her that they’d have fun together; then she betrayed her by quitting. • During the game, Sue betrayed Hal’s hiding place to Jim.
[-d, -ing, -al, -er n.] [Syn. deceive, reveal] between (bit WEEN) prep. 1. in or through the area separating two things; 2. in the time separating two things; 3. along a path that connects two things —adv. 1. in a middle location, time, space, or function; 2. in the midst of; 3. in confidence • The gate is between the third and fourth fence posts. • Lunchtime comes between breakfast and dinner times. • That color is between blue and green. • Second gear is between first and third gears. • In between jobs, Hannah and her sisters took a vacation. • Let’s keep this between you and me.
bewilder (bee WIL der) vt.
to thoroughly confuse, as by something very involved and complicated; befuddle; puzzle
• Jose was bewildered by the Times’ crossword puzzle. • Alice’s disappearing coin trick served to bewilder Francine. • On Ian’s visit to the art supply store, he was faced with a bewildering selection of brushes and palette knives.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. puzzle]
bias (BY uhs) n.
1. a line cut or sewn on the diagonal to the weave of a cloth; 2. a mental partiality or slant; bent; partiality; inclination —vt. to have a prejudice; to influence
• The seamstress sewed the hem on a bias. • As Jason aged, his childhood bias in favor of dark-meat chicken had changed to one for white meat; go figure. • The attorney feared that the judge might be unduly biased by his client’s unsavory reputation. • Kira’s wallpaper choice is biased by her love of earth tones.
[-ed, -ing
bicker (BI kuhr) vi.
1. to quarrel in a petty manner; to squabble; 2. (rare) to move with quick, rippling noises —n. 1. a little quarrel; 2. a rippling or a pattering sound
• Carl and Violet bicker all the time about everything. • The brook bickers in the breeze. • Carl and Violet just had another minor bicker. • One can barely hear the bicker of a snake coming down the path.
[-ed, -ing]
bilk (BILK) vt.
1. to thwart; 2. to swindle; cheat; defraud; 3. to escape or flee leaving unpaid debts; 4. to elude
• The raccoon bilked all attempts to catch him. • The investors were bilked out of millions by crooked management. • Nate bilked the bank by his failure to make payments. • The crook bilked the police.
[-ed, -ing]
biological (BY uh LAH gzhi kl) adj.
1. of or connected to living things; 2. related genetically, in contrast to by adoption
• A botanist is only interested in the plant part of the biological sciences. • Mark’s scientific interests are purely biological. • Your biological parents are your real mother and father.
[-ly adv. (also biologic)]
blueprint (BLOO print) n.
1. a plan drawn in white on a blue background and used by architects or engineers; 2. any exact or detailed plan
• The contractor checked the blueprint of the house to see what materials he would need to order. • With its adoption in 1789, the U.S. Constitution became the blueprint for American democracy.
bog (BAHG) n.
wet, spongy area of ground, noted for smelly decaying mosses that form peat —vi., vt. to get stuck in; mired (usually with down)
• For organic matter, Martha used peat from the nearby bog to enrich her garden soil. • The Medicare revisions got bogged down in committee.
[-ged, -ging]
bore (BAWR) vt.
1. to make a hole with a drill; 2. to dig a well, tunnel, etc. with a turning helical tool; 3. to push one’s way (through) —vi. to tire of or lose interest in —n. 1. a hole made by a drill; 2. the interior of a hollow tube
• Before hanging the door, I must bore holes for the hinges. • Gino bored holes for the deck’s concrete footings. • Gracie bored through the rush-hour crowd. • Go away; you bore me. • The plot was very predictable, and therefore very boring. • The hole in the wall was a very shallow bore. • Shotgun barrels come in various bores.
[-d, boring, -dom n.
brain (BRAYN) n.
1. the mass of tissue inside the skull of vertebrates; the organ that is the destination for the spinal cord, the main center of reasoning and interpreter of senses, as well as the director of motor functions; 2. a comparable organ in an invertebrate; 3. (often pl.) mental capacity; intelligence; 4. (usually pl.) the chief organizer or planner of a group event; head director —vt. to hit hard on the head
• No computer can yet equal the human brain. • A flea’s brain is not very complex. • You don’t need instructions; just use your brains. • When it comes to planning, Kevin’s the brains of this outfit. • Roger got brained by the baseball bat.
[-ed, -ing]
brandish (BRAEN dish) vt.
to wave about or shake, in a threatening or challenging way; flourish
• When you brandish that saber, everyone ducks for cover. • Helen brandished the fireplace poker as if she wanted to strike someone with it.
[-ed, -ing]
burden (BOER din) n.
1. a load; anything carried; 2. something one has to put up with; a heavy load; hard work; sorrow or responsibility —vt. to weigh down; to oppress
• The drywall was a heavy burden for the roof of the car. • When Jill sat on the jury, she had the burden of deciding the guilt or innocence of the defendant. • Certain trucks are classified by the burden they can carry. • I hate to burden you with the job of deciding what to wear.
[-ed, -ing]
burrow (BOER o) n.
1. a hole dug by an animal or a tunnel in the ground; 2. any hole or passage serving as a shelter, refuge, etc. —vi. 1. to dig (into, under, etc.); 2. search as if by digging —vt. to make burrows in the ground
• Groundhogs live in burrows of their own making. • Some animals often find shelter in burrows dug by others. • Burrowing through old files led to finding the real murderer. • Construction crews burrowed beneath the English Channel to build the Chunnel, connecting the U.K. and France.
[-ed, -ing] buttress* (BUH tris) n. a brace, usually of brick or stone, built against a wall to support or reinforce it; a prop —vt. 1. to support or reinforce with such a structure; 2. to prop up; bolster • Many Gothic buildings sport buttresses to reinforce them. • Flash cards can be thought of as buttresses for rote learning of facts. • Buttress your argument against the tax hike by having the documentation concerning the results of previous hikes. [-ed, -ing
cajole (kuh JOHL) vt.
to coax with insincere talk; to flatter in hopes of getting one’s way; to wheedle
• Maxine tried to cajole her husband into going to the movies. • Barney cajoled Lois to accompany him to the book sale.
[-d, cajoling, -ry n., cajolingly adv.] [Syn. coax]
calamity (kuh LAM i tee) n.
1. deep trouble; misery; 2. any great misfortune entailing sorrow and loss; disaster
• The loss of a loved one is always a calamity. • The attack on the World Trade Center ranks with Pearl Harbor among the U.S.A.’s greatest calamities.
[calamitous adj., calamitously adv.] [Syn. disaster]
camaraderie (kam uh RAD oer ee) n.
warm, friendly feelings of loyalty among comrades; comradeship
• Camaraderie is most likely to develop among military comrades who have been through some combat together. • A general feeling of camaraderie pervaded the air as the business associates gathered in the tavern to relax and share their tales on a Friday afternoon.
campaign (kam PAYN) n.
1. a sequence of military operations aimed at a certain objective; 2. a series of organized actions for some specific purpose —vi. to be involved in a campaign
• The Second World War’s European campaign was fought to liberate the captive nations and to defeat Germany. • Andrea was involved in the presidential election campaign. • She campaigned enthusiastically for (then) Senator Kerry.
[-ed, -ing, -er n.] [Syn. battle]
canvass (KAV vuhs) vt.
1. to look over carefully; 2. to go to or among (people) to seek votes, orders, etc. —vi. to try to get votes, orders, etc.; solicit —n. the act of asking a targeted group of people questions such as who they voted for, what brands they use, etc., especially in an attempt to estimate the outcome of an election, sales campaign, etc.
• Charlie canvassed the canvas with the art appraiser to determine the insurance value of the painting. • Samantha canvassed the mothers at the soccer game, trying to get some orders for Daryl’s school fund-raiser. • Canvassing potential voters was how the paper was able to predict the outcome of the election.
[**Alert** Do not confuse with canvas, the cloth.] [-ed, -ing, -er n.
captive (KAP tiv) n.
1. one captured and held prisoner; 2. a person enthralled, as by love or beauty —adj. 1. taken or held prisoner; 2. unable to act independently; 3. made to watch/listen (as in a captive audience)
• The captive was behind bars. • The first time Iris saw San Francisco, she became captive to its charm. • A babysitter is captive to his or her charge. • For many years, Poland was a captive nation of the USSR. • Ian loves to play his guitar before a captive audience.
career (kuh RIR) n.
1. one’s way of earning a living; lifework; 2. a profession or occupation for which one trains and which one pursues for life —adj. adapting a normally temporary activity as a lifework
• One’s career is not always the one prepared for. • Some veterinarians pursue that career deliberately, while for others it is a booby prize for failing medical school. • Herbert decided to become a career soldier. carnivore* (KAHR ni VAWR) n. 1. any of a number of fanged, flesh-eating mammals, like lions and tigers and bears; 2. an animal that eats other animals; 3. a plant that eats small animals—especially insects. • Unlike herbivores, who eat plants, and omnivores, who eat both plants and animals, a carnivore prefers a diet of meat. • The Venus flytrap is a plant that can be categorized a carnivore.
[carnivorous adj., carnivorously adv.
carnivorous (kahr NIV oer uhs) adj.
1. flesh eating (as opposed to herbivorous); 2. insect eating (applying to some plants); 3. of the carnivores
• Wolves hunt mostly mammalian prey because they are carnivorous. • The sundew represents a class of carnivorous plants. • Having canine teeth, or fangs, is a carnivorous trait.
cartographer (kahr TOG ruh fuhr) n.
a person who designs and makes maps or charts
• Mercator is the name of the man who is probably the best-known cartographer who ever lived. • Robinson is another well-known cartographer. castigate* (KAS ti gayt) vt. to punish or bawl out, especially by using harsh public criticism • The police chief proceeded to castigate the officers for showing poor judgment dealing with the demonstrators. • The nine-year-old castigated the president for not being able to pronounce “nuclear.”
[-d, castigating, castigation, castigator n., castigatory adj.] [Syn. punish] catalyst* (KAT uh list) n. 1. an agent in a chemical reaction that causes the reaction to speed up, but does not itself undergo any permanent change; 2. a person or thing that speeds up a result • During the process of photosynthesis, chlorophyll is the catalyst for plants combining water and carbon dioxide to manufacture sugar and oxygen in the presence of light. • The catalyst for Karen and David giving their realtor an immediate deposit on the house was another couple’s interest in it.
catnap (KAT nap) n.
a doze; a short, light sleep —vi. to take a snooze
• The watchman often takes two- or three-minute catnaps. • Karen often catnaps while watching TV at night.
[-ped, -ping]
cautious (KAW shus) adj.
very careful; trying to avoid danger; wary; circumspect
• The bomb-squad member was very cautious in his approach to the mysterious package. • Cautious people regret less later.
[-ness n., -ly adv.] [Syn. careful]
celebrate (SEL eb RAYT) vt.
1. to perform some kind of public and formal ritual; 2. to mark an anniversary, a holiday, etc. with ceremony or festiveness; 3. to praise or honor publicly; 4. to perform cheerful activity to mark an occasion
• Melissa and Gino invited 200 people to celebrate their wedding. • Let’s celebrate Arbor Day with a tree-planting ceremony. • We join with Timmy to celebrate Lassie’s heroics yet again. • Get out the noisemakers and funny hats so that we can celebrate the ringing in of the New Year.
[-d, celebrating, celebration n.] [Syn. commemorate, observe
censor (SEN soer) n.
1. an official with the power to examine books, movies, TV programs, etc. and to remove anything objectionable; 2. an official in times of war who reads mail, news articles, etc. and removes anything he/she thinks might help the enemy —vt. to put a book, writer, etc. to such treatment as just described
• Comic George Carlin made a living from parodying the TV censor with his routine about seven words you can’t say on TV. • During the Second World War, people at home received mail from their relatives in the armed forces that had whole paragraphs blacked out by the censors. • In the Soviet Union, every newspaper article was censored.
[-ed, -ing, -ship n.]
century (SEN che ree) n.
1. any span of 100 years; 2. a specific period of 100 years dating from the beginning of the Christian (or Common) Era; 3. a series, group, or subdivision of 100
• A century passed between the beginnings of the American Civil War and our involvement in Vietnam. • Alexander the Great lived in the fourth century B.C. • Roman legions were divided into centuries, each of which consisted of 100 men.
cerebral (SIR ib ril or sir EEB ril) adj.
1. concerning the brain or the cerebrum; 2. appealing to the intellect—not the emotions; intellectual
• A cerebral hemorrhage is not a pleasant prospect. • The cerebral cortex is where higher brain functions occur. • Tchaikovsky’s music is more emotional than cerebral.
certain (SOER tin) adj.
1. fixed, settled, or specific; 2. certain to occur; inevitable; 3. undoubtable; unquestionable; 4. reliable; dependable; 5. an amount, but not very much
• We’ll get a certain trade-in allowance for the old car. • The sun is certain to rise tomorrow. • It is certain that Gary committed the robbery. • You can be certain of a fair hearing. • A certain number of people will believe anything.
[-ty n.] [Syn. sure]
challenge (CHA linj) n.
1. a demand for identification; 2. questioning; a demand for proof or for an explanation; 3. a dare or an urge to participate; 4. any job that requires special effort; 5. a questioning of a vote or one’s right to vote —vt. to do any of the preceding things
• The sentry gave the challenge to the incoming patrol. • It’s a challenge to explain Tom’s behaving so strangely. • The Count answered the Marquis’ challenge to a duel. • Getting the dog to behave properly is quite a challenge. • The committee member challenged the visitor’s right to take part in the group’s vote. • I was challenged to show my ticket at the theater door.
[-d, challenging
character (KAR ik tir) n.
1. a special mark; 2. any symbol or letter that’s used in writing and printing; 3. style of printing or handwriting; 4. a magical symbol or mystic emblem; a code or cipher; 5. a distinctive quality or trait; an attribute; a characteristic; 6. essential quality; nature; 7. the personality of an individual or group; 8. status; position; 9. a part in a play, movie, etc.
• The cabinetmaker marked the drawer bottom with his own character to identify it as having been made by him. • Omega is the final character of the Greek alphabet. • Arabic characters are used in our system of numerals. • Philip’s handwriting has a great deal of character. • A pyramid with an eye is a character on the Great Seal of the United States of America. • It is the character of the scorpion to sting indiscriminately. • I recommend Edith as having character of the highest sort. • Sheep have the character of flocking together. • The character of the presidency is one of great power. • Don’t always take the advice of an actor, just because the character he plays is that of a doctor on TV.
[Syn. disposition, quality
circumstance (SIR kuhm STAENS) n.
1. a fact or event that goes with another, as an essential factor or incidentally; 2. any situation; event; 3. conditions affecting a person
• When there is thunder, the presence of lightning is an inescapable circumstance. • A circumstance for buying cotton candy is a circus visit. • Charles was in difficult financial circumstances.
cite (SYT) vt.
1. to demand an appearance before a court; 2. to quote (a passage, book, writer, speech, etc.); 3. to refer to or bring up (as precedent)
• Henry was cited to appear in traffic court next Wednesday. • Mary always cites some classical composer as the inspiration for her musical compositions. • Brown v. Board of Education is a case lawyers often cite when arguing for equal educational opportunities in court.
[-d, citing, citation n.]
civil (SI vil) adj.
1. of a citizen or citizens; 2. of a community of citizens or their interactions; 3. cultured; 4. courteous or polite
• All citizens are entitled to certain civil rights. • Civil war is an oxymoron, like military intelligence. • Civil people should develop an appreciation for the arts. • It is important to be civil, rather than rude, to one another.
clarifiy (KLA ri fy) vi.
 vt. 1. to make or become clear (especially liquids); 2. to make or become easier to comprehend
• The chef passed the chicken soup through a strainer to clarify the broth. • Jane clarified the point she was trying to get across. • Often a map will serve to clarify the directions to a place.
[clarifies, clarified, -ing, clarification* n.]
classical (KLAS i kl) adj.
1. of the highest class; excellent; 2. having a balanced and simple style; restrained; the name of an era bestowed by historians, such as the Classical Era in music history, which preceded the Romantic Era; 3. typical of or based on the literary works of ancient Greece and Rome; 4. well versed in Greek and Roman literature and culture; 5. music in the European style, as distinct from folk, popular, or jazz
• The Rolex watch is classical and worth every thousand. • The Jaguar XJ6 has absolutely classical (or classic) lines. • Shakespeare’s tragedies followed those of Sophocles and Euripides as being both classical and timeless. • Until the 1950s, the college graduates of modern Europe and those from Ivy League colleges were given classical educations, with a knowledge of Latin being essential. • Mozart, Haydn, and Beethoven are generally considered the greatest classical composers, although Beethoven bridges the Classical and Romantic eras.
[-ly adv., -ity n.
clique (KLEEK or KLIK) n.
a small, exclusive circle of people; snobbish or narrow coterie (Common interest and snobbery are implied.)
• The cheerleaders kept together in their own clique. • The Obscure Poets Society was a self-important, highbrow clique that generally looked down on others.
[-ish or cliquish adj., cliquishly adv., cliquishness n.] [Syn. coterie]
cloying (KLOY ing) adj.
1. displeasing or distasteful due to excess; 2. excessively sweet, sentimental, etc.
• The romance novel was cloying in its sentimentality. • The date can have a cloying sweetness that causes many people to avoid eating that fruit unless it is only one of several ingredients, as in date-nut bread.
[-ly adv., (to) cloy vt.]
cohere (koh HEER) vi.
1. to stick together; 2. to be connected naturally or logically, as by some common idea or principle; 3. to become or stay united in action; be in accord
• Grapes appear to cohere until you notice the tiny stems. • Freedoms of religion and press seem to logically cohere. • The U.S. and U.K. cohered from 1941 through 1945 in their fight against the Nazis.
[-d, cohering, -nt adj., -nce, cohesion, cohesiveness n.] [Syn. stick]
colleague (KAH leeg) n.
a fellow worker; one in the same profession
• Matt and Louise were colleagues at the electric company. • Dr. Lang and Dr. Griffith were colleagues at Lehigh Hospital.
[Syn. associate]
collect (kuh LEKT) vt.
1. to bring together; assemble; 2. to call for and receive (for example, taxes); 3. to regain control (of oneself); 4. to pick up; go get —vi. to gather; assemble —adj., adv. to be payed for by the recipient
• Libby collects bottle caps as a hobby. • The news boy collects fees weekly from his patrons. • You need to collect your wits before reading another word. • June collects aluminum cans to turn in for the 10¢ deposit. • The crowd collected outside the ballpark. • When you get there, call collect.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. gather]
collection (kuh LEK shin) n.
1. the act or process of accumulating; 2. the things collected; 3. a pile; an accumulation; 4. money collected, as by a fund-raiser
• A weekly collection of garbage is essential for urban living. • Laurie has quite an extensive stamp collection. • Ian has some collection of dirty clothes in his room. • After the religious service, a collection plate was passed.
collector (kuh LEK toer) n.
a person or thing that accumulates (for example, a person whose job is to collect overdue bills, taxes, etc. or a person whose hobby is collecting stamps, books, etc.)
• The tax collector has very few friends in town. • When told that everyone should collect something, Allan replied that he is a collector of dust.
colloquial (kuh LOH kwee il) adj.
1. normal conversational style; 2. used to describe words, phrases, etc. that are used in everyday speech; informal
• It ain’t necessarily so is all right to use as a colloquial expression, but it would be improper in formal speech or writing. • Personally, hearing a person say, “How are youse today?” (meaning the two of you), hurts my ears, yet the phrase is in widespread colloquial use.
[-ly adv.]
collusion (kuh LOO zhin) n.
a secret agreement for illegal or fraudulent purpose; conspiracy
• The court found that there was collusion between Daniel and Joy to defraud the royal family. • Collusion to commit robbery is a felony punishable by jail.
[collusive adj., collusively adv.
comedic (kuh MEE dik) adj.
of or having to do with comedy; humorous
• John Cleese had a comedic walk in Monty Python’s Ministry of Silly Walks routine. • Mike Meyers’ comedic portrayals appeal to some people more than they do to others.
[-ally adv.]
commencement (kuh MENS mint) n.
1. the beginning or start; the time of same; 2. the school or college ceremonies at which degrees or diplomas are awarded; 3. the day upon which this takes place
• The commencement of the show will be at 8 P.M. • Lafayette High School’s commencement will be held at the field house. • Yale’s commencement is often on a Thursday.
comment (KOM ent) n.
1. a note that explains, criticizes, or illustrates something written or said; annotation; 2. a remark or observation made to express criticism or opinion; 3. talk; chatter; gossip —vi. to comment on; to make remarks
• George just had to make a comment on Paul’s theories. • When Sue remarked that it was hot in the room, Pam felt it necessary to comment in her support. • With gossips, it’s just one comment after another. • Some people find it necessary to comment on practically anything and everything.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. remark]
commercial (kuh MER shil) adj.
1. of or connected to trade; 2. of or having to do with stores, office buildings, etc.; 3. of a lower grade or for use in large amounts in industry —n. paid radio or TV advertisement
• The ship was engaged in international commercial trade. • Beth’s neighborhood was zoned for commercial use, so she had no recourse when the grocery opened next door. • The warehouse club sells mayonnaise in gallon jars, suitable for commercial use but kind of large for use at home. • Some of the most entertaining television these days is to be found in softdrink commercials.
commitment (kuh MIT mint) n.
1. a delivering for safekeeping; 2. official internment of a person to a prison or a mental institution; 3. a promise to do something; 4. dedication to a long-term involvement; 5. a financial liability
• A burial service accompanied the commitment of the naval officer’s body to the ocean depths. • It’ll take a court order to affect the commitment of this book’s author to the booby hatch.• The Heart Association is looking for a commitment to contribute and for you to encourage your neighbors to do so, too. • The U.S. has a commitment to defend the Americas. • Getting a mortgage is a long-term financial commitment.
communication (kuhm YOO ni KAY shuhn) n.
1. a giving or exchanging of information, messages, etc.; 2. the information so exchanged; 3. a medium for exchanging information; 4. the art of expressing ideas; 5. the science of transmitting information
• There was good communication among the jury members. • The communication received from the spy satellite held obsolete plans for a Spacely sprocket. • Satellites permit almost instant communication by electronic signals anywhere on earth. • Vera has less-than-admirable communication skills. • The armed forces communication system is constantly being upgraded with the latest bells and whistles.
comparative (kuhm PA ruh tiv) adj.
1. estimated by relating it to something else; relative; 2. comparing one thing to another —n. 1. in grammar, the comparative degree (words ending in er); 2. a word or form in this degree
• Height is one comparative way to relate buildings. • Comparative linguistics notes similarities and differences between languages, both in grammar and vocabulary. • The comparative degree in grammer goes from tall to taller, as opposed to the superlative, which is tallest. • Bigger, smaller, newer, and older are all comparatives.
[-ly adv.]
comparison (kuhm PAR is uhn) n.
1. estimation of similarities and differences; 2. sufficiently similar in likeness to make a relating of one to the other possible
• Apples and watermelons are two fruits with seeds, but any further comparison might prove fruitless. • A comparison of lemons and limes might be made with respect to their colors, tartness, and climatic habitats.
compassion (kuhm PA shin) n.
sorrow for the suffering or problems of another or others, often accompanied by an urge to help; deep sympathy; pity
• Tina had great compassion for the families of the victims of the earthquake. • Rosita was driven by her compassion for the homeless to volunteer twice weekly at the local shelter.
[-ate adj., -ately adv.] [Syn. pity
compel (kuhm PEL) vt.
1. to force; constrain; 2. to get or cause by force
• Eve had to compel Adam to try her applesauce. • Iraq used its army to compel Kuwait to share its oil income.
[-led, -ling, -lable adj., -ler n.] [Syn. force]
competent (KOM pit int) adj.
1. well qualified; capable; fit (sometimes used with to); 2. sufficient; adequate; 3. permissible or properly belonging
• Vi’s M.A. made her quite competent academically to apply for the teaching position. • One doesn’t need to be an electrician to have competent credentials to change a lightbulb. • The judge ruled Jack competent to stand trial for murder.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. able]
competition (kom pet ISH in) n.
1. the act of competing; rivalry; 2. a contest or match; 3. official participation in an organized sport; 4. the opposition in a contest; 5. the person or persons against whom one competes
• Jimmy Connors and Andre Agassi were often competition for one another on the tennis courts. • The 100-meter hurdles competition will start at 2 P.M. • To paticipate in the competition, an application form must be filed, and an entry fee must be paid.• The New York Yankees have been the Boston Red Sox’s fiercest competition over the years for the AL crown. • Lucy was always Desi’s competition when it came to getting attention from an audience. competitive* (kuhm PET it iv) adj. 1. of, involving, or based on competing; 2. having a chance in a competition • When it comes to job opportunities, quarterback is the most highly competitive field. • Jerri was always competitive with her twin sister, Merri. • The Pacers basketball team’s eight-foot-tall center gave them a competitive edge over all their likely opponents.
[-ness n., -ly adv.]
complain (kuhm PLAYN) vi.
1. to announce or express pain, displeasure, etc.; 2. to find fault; state annoyance; 3. to make an accusation; make formal objection; bring charges
• Frank’s mom loves hearing Frank complain how his toe hurts where he stubbed it; just ask her. • Barb’s neighbors often complain about her loud stereo. • Betty complained to the police that Archie had damaged her front lawn when he and Reggie trespassed on it.
[-ed, -ing, -er, -t n.] complex (kuhm PLEKS for adj., KOM pleks for n.) adj. 1. made up of two or more related parts; 2. not simple; 3. involved or complicated —n. 1. a collection of interrelated ideas, activities, etc. that form a single whole; 2. a group of units, such as buildings or roads, that together form a single whole; 3. an unconscious psychological condition related to a particular thing or activity • A complex sentence has at least two clauses, one of which is independent and one or more of which is subordinate. • A camera is too complex an instrument to repair yourself. • The interrelationship of characters in a Shakespearean play is usually quite complex. • The vitamin-B complex consists of at least 12 parts. • A housing complex might contain a few storefronts for the convenience of the tenants. • The fact that April suffered from an inferiority complex did not necessarily mean that she was not inferior. [-ity adv.] composure* (kum POH zhur) n. a calmness of mind or manner; tranquillity; self-possession; one’s togetherness • Though all about him were rife with excitement or dismay, Winston Churchill seldom lost his composure. • Composure is one of the most important conditions to retain to behave rationally in an emergency. [Syn. equanimity
comprehensive (KOM pri HEN siv) adj.
1. dealing with all or many of the relevant details; inclusive; 2. able to understand fully; 3. a type of property insurance covering many risks in the same policy
• A comprehensive survey should test the mood of the voters on many different issues. • Hailee has a comprehensive mind, which allows her to grasp ideas in their entirety. • Carrying comprehensive insurance that will cover scratches and malicious mischief on your car is rarely recommended for older vehicles.
[-ly adv., -ness n.]
compromise (KOM pri MYZ) n.
1. a settlement in which each side gives up something to reach a middle ground; 2. an adjustment of opposing principles, systems, etc. by modifying some aspects of each; the result of such an adjustment; 3. something midway between two others in quality, position, etc.; 4. a baring of one’s reputation to danger, suspicion, or disrepute —vt. 1. to settle or adjust by concessions on both sides; 2. to lay open to danger, suspicion, or disrepute; 3. to weaken one’s principles, ideals, etc. to expedite things
• The Missouri Compromise permitted Missouri to enter the Union as a slave state and Maine to enter as a free state. • A compromise is the result of two sides coming together to close the distance between them. • Joe was on the extreme right, Debbie was on the extreme left, and Mike compromised, midway between them. • Being seen with you might cause my reputation to be compromised. • If we all compromise, we’ll be out of here a lot sooner. • Do you expect me to compromise my principles just to get us out of here in a shorter time?
[-d, compromising]
compulsion (kuhm PUHL shin) n.
1. being forced; being coerced; constraint; 2. something that forces; 3. an irresistible irrational impulse to perform an act
• Jane felt a compulsion to seek out chocolate ice cream, despite the rather late hour. • The subpoena was compulsion enough for Bill to show up. • The news junkie watched one news broadcast after another, unable to shake the compulsion to stay informed.
[compulsive, compulsory adj., compulsorily adv.]
concept (KON sept) n.
1. an idea or thought, especially one of an abstract nature; 2. an original idea, design, or concept; 3. a central unifying idea or theme
• The automaker had a concept of what the car of the future should look like and be able to do. • Given the job to create a perfect building for milking cows, the architect sketched out a few concepts. • The décor was in keeping with the concept of a Vietnamese theme restaurant and lounge.
[Syn. idea
concern (kuhn SOERN) vt.
1. to be about or to involve; 2. to draw in; engage or involve; 3. to cause to feel uneasy or anxious —n. 1. a matter of interest or importance to one; 2. interest in or regard for a person or thing; 3. relation; reference; 4. worry; anxiety
• The Iliad concerns a war between Greece and Troy. • A good teacher tries to concern parents with their children’s day-to-day school experiences. • It concerns Lois that she has not yet heard from her tax preparation person. • Mark’s well-being is a concern of Diane’s. • Sandy has a financial concern in the company’s health. • The stock market’s fall was a great concern of those nearing retirement.
[-ed, -ing; also -ed adj. and -ing prep.] [Syn. care
concert (KON soert) n.
1. mutual agreement; concord; togetherness of action; 2. a music program in which a number of musicians perform together
• Pete and Andy were careful to paddle the canoe in concert. • Getting the car out of the snow took a concerted effort. • Five singing groups performed at the April concert.
[-ed adj. (in) concert
conclusion (kuhn KLOO zhn) n.
1. the end or final part; 2. the result of the reasoning process; judgment; decision; an opinion reached after investigating; the last in a chain of events
• The coda is the conclusion of many musical pieces and is used to reinforce the main idea. • After thinking it through thoroughly, the conclusion that the butler had done it was unavoidable. • Scotland Yard’s investigator reached the same conclusion. • The “Waltz of the Flowers” is the conclusion to Tchaikowsky’s The Nutcracker Suite.
condemn (kuhn DEM) vt.
1. to blame; strongly disapprove of; censure; 2. to declare guilty of wrongdoing; to doom; pronounce penalty on; 3. to claim private property for public use by using the power of eminent domain; expropriate; 4. to declare unfit for service
• We all condemn the actions of the 9/11 hijackers. • Let us condemn the serial killer to a life in jail. • The city condemned five private homes to make room for the football stadium’s parking lot. • The run-down tenement will be condemned and demolished.
[-ed, -ing, -er n.] [Syn. criticize]
condescend (KON dis END) vi.
1. to lower oneself to the level of the person one is dealing with; to graciously and willing do something regarded as beneath one’s dignity; deign; 2. to deal with others in a proud or haughty way
• The judge may condescend to explain his decision to the convicted felon, even though the law does not require it. • Our cat condescends to hang out with the dog from time to time, even though she makes it abundantly clear that she occupies a much higher social level than he does. • The elite castes in traditional India would not condescend to speak with an untouchable.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. stoop]
condition (kuhn DISH uhn) n.
1. anything that’s a requirement before performing or doing something else; 2. any prerequisite to the happening of another thing, event, etc.; 3. something that modifies or restricts the nature, existence, or occurrence of something else; 4. state of being; health; 5. social position; rank; station —vt. 1. to set as a requirement; to stipulate; 2. to impose rules on; 3. to affect, modify, or influence; 4. to bring to a desired state
• Being paid in advance is a condition of my not singing at charity concerts; if you heard me sing, you’d know why. • Fertile soil is one condition of good crop growth. • Lack of sun is a condition preventing my having a nice lawn. • Alex’s condition has improved since he saw the doctor. • The vice president’s condition keeps him in close touch with the pulse of the Senate.• Sarah’s mom conditioned her going to the party on her being home by 10 P.M. at the latest. • Ulie’s outer garb is conditioned on the weather report. • After shampooing, it helps to condition one’s hair.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. state] conduct (KON duhct for n., kuhn DUHCT for vt.) n. 1. the process or way of managing or directing; 2. how one acts; behavior —vt. 1. to show the way to; to lead; to guide; to escort; 2. to manage, control, or direct; 3. to behave; 4. to be able to transmit, convey, or carry • Hands-on conduct is how Rocio handles her investments. • Richard has never been sent to the office for bad conduct. • The tour guide conducts a new group every half hour. • While Leonard Bernstien was music director of the New York Philharmonic, he frequently conducted his own works. • Children should conduct themselves properly in public. • Aluminum conducts heat better than steel but not as well as copper. [-ed, -ing, -ible adj., -ibility adv.]
confirm (kuhn FIRM) vt.
1. to strengthen; establish; encourage; 2. to make valid by formal approval; to ratify; 3. to prove truth, validity, or authenticity of; 4. to cause to go through the religious ceremony of confirmation
• We should confirm our reservations to make sure they hold our spaces on tomorrow morning’s flight. • The appointment of a Supreme Court justice must be confirmed by a twothirds vote of the Senate to be valid. • Ruth contacted the manufacturer to confirm that the model on sale was the latest one. • Ray’s parents arranged for him to be confirmed.
[-ed, -ing, -ation n.] [Syn. verify, validate]
confiscate (KON fis kayt) vt.
1. to seize (private property) for the public treasury, usually as a penalty; 2. to seize by or as by authority; appropriate —adj. 1. taken away; 2. having property seized
• In some states, automobiles driven while under the influence of an intoxicant are confiscated. • A counterfeit bill is always confiscated by the bank teller who spots it, on authority of the Treasury Department. • Vera sued the city, trying to recover her confiscated car. • Bill hadn’t yet delivered his confiscated handgun.
[confiscated, confiscating, confiscator, confiscation n.]
conflate (kuhnf LAYT) vt.
to combine or mix (for example, two different readings into a single text); to bring together; to fuse; to join or meld
• There is a tendency in some corners to conflate all drug use into a single dreadful statistic. • Ralph’s film conflates the the past and present through skillful use of flashbacks.conflict (kuhn FLIKT for vi., KON flikt for n.) vi. to be contradictory; be in opposition; clash —n. 1. a fight or struggle, especially a lengthy one; war; 2. sharp disagreement or opposition; clash; 3. emotional disturbance resulting from a clash of impulses • Sometimes Fran’s emotions conflict with her brain, her heart pulling one way and her head pulling the other. • The Hundred Years’ War was a very lengthy conflict. • Todd’s sweet tooth is in a conflict with his need to diet. • Emotional conflict can often result from a desire to do two or more things at the same time.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. fight, struggle]
confront (kon FRUHNT) vt.
1. to stand or meet face-to-face; 2. to face or oppose boldly or defiantly; 3. bring face-to-face with
• The boxers first confronted each other over a couple of Philadelphia cheesesteak sandwiches. • Two fencers confront each other with staple guns drawn. • Eric learned to confront his fear of pussycats by getting his very own kitten.
[-ed, -ing, -ation n., -ational adj.]
confuse (kuhn FYOOZ) vt.
1. to mix up; put in disorder; 2. to mix up mentally; perplex; bewilder; 3. to fail to distinguish between; err in identifying
• To confuse Gino, Jim walked backward with his arms extended in front of him. • Anna confused real events with imaginary ones. • Charlie confused a Chevrolet with an Oldsmobile.
[-d, confusing, confusion n.] [Syn. puzzle
congruous (KON groo uhs) adj.
1. congruent; 2. fitting; suitable; appropriate
• Congruous figures are exactly the same shape and size. • When appearing in public, a member of Congress is expected to demonstrate congruous behavior at all times.
[-ly adv., -ness n.]
connection (kuhn NEK shuhn) n.
1. a coupling, a joining or unifying; a unification 2. a means of joining; 3. a relationship; 4. a business associate; 5. the means of changing from one train, bus, etc. en route to somewhere; 6. a circuit in electricity; a line of communication between two points in telegraphy, telephony, etc.
• A connection is made between two pipes by means of some type of coupling. • Connection from car engine to radiator is by rubber hose. • You can just sense that Ted and Alice have a connection. • Bill was looking for an MP3 player, and he thought his connection with the appliance store worker might help him to get one at a good price. • When Juanita flew from New York to Miami, she had to make a connection at Atlanta. • Most electrical connections are made by sticking a plug into a wall outlet. consciousness* (KON shuhs nes) n. 1. the state of being aware; awareness of one’s own feelings or one’s surroundings; 2. the totality of one’s thoughts, feelings, etc. • Having been out cold, Ali gradually regained consciousness. • Stream of consciousness entails saying or writing whatever pops into your head in the order that it does. • Consciousness implies both an awareness of and an inclination to interact with the world around you.
consensus (kuhn SEN suhs) n.
1. an opinion held by all or most; 2. general agreement of opinion
• There is a consensus among Americans that democracy is a superior form of government to autocracy. • There is a consensus among men that male drivers are superior to female drivers. • Amazingly, the exact opposite consensus exists among women and, astonishingly, is supported by statistical data.
consequence (KON si KWENS) n.
1. a result of an action; outcome; effect; 2. a logical conclusion; 3. the relation of effect to cause; 4. importance
• A consequence of buying a new pen is a handwritten note. • Having the correct time can be a consequence of keeping a fresh battery in your wristwatch. • The consequence of consuming a lot of dairy products as a child will be strong teeth and bones as an adult. • The Emperor Maximillian’s presence in Mexico during the American Civil War was of no consequence in the war’s outcome.
[consequent adj., consequently adv.] [Syn. effect, importance
consider (kuhn SID uhr) vt.
1. to think about; ponder; 2. to keep in mind; take into account; 3. to be thoughtful of others
• In studying World War I, one must consider the alliances that had been formed among the nations of Europe. • Her health is really very good, if you consider her age. • We cannot give our security contract to a new provider without considering its effect on our current provider.
[-ed, -ing, -ation n.] [Syn. contemplate, weigh]
consist (kuhn SIST) vi.
1. to be made up of; 2. to be contained or inherent in; 3. to be characterized by
• Water consists of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. • Wisdom consists of more than just knowing facts. • Her cultural pursuits consist of watching television. construct (kuhn STRUHKT for v., KAHN strukt for n.) vt. 1. to create; 2. to draw a figure to meet specifications —n. 1. something built or put together systematically; 2. a concept or theory devised to unify diverse data • Some children love to construct buidings with interlocking plastic blocks, and so do I. • Suzanne was asked to construct an isosceles triangle congruent to the one in her geometry book. • The plan for the new field house was a construct that had taken two years and hundreds of meetings to achieve. • The big-bang theory is a construct to explain discoveries and observations of astronomers over the last century.
contaminate (kuhn TAM in AYT) vt.
to corrupt, make impure, infect, etc. by adding something that shouldn’t be there; pollute; defile; taint
• Truck exhaust fumes contaminate the air we all breathe. • Salt contaminates seawater, making it undrinkable for us. • The nuclear accident at Chernobyl contaminated much of northern Europe’s pasturelands.
[-d, contaminating, contaminator n.] [Syn. defile, taint, corrupt]
contemplate (KON tem PLAYT) vt.
1. to stare at intently; 2. to think about carefully; study intently; 3. to keep in mind as a possibile plan of action
• Jerry contemplated the telephone bill, studying the total charges in disbelief. • The coach contemplated whom to put into the starting lineup for the next day’s game. • To improve our property value, please contemplate running away from home (please).
[-d, contemplating, contemplation n.] [Syn. consider]contemporary* (kuhn TEM poer ery) adj. 1. living or occurring in the same time frame; 2. around the same age; 3. from recent times; modern —n. a person who lived at the same time as another/others; the same age as another/others • The first Super Bowl was contemporary with the Dodgers and Giants moving from New York to California. • Willis is Francesco’s contemporary, both of them having been born about six years ago. • Michael Schelle’s compositions are exemplary of contemporary serious music. • Composer Franz Joseph Haydn was a contemporary of George Washington but outlived him by 10 years. [contemporaneous adj.]
contemptuous (kuhn TEMP choo uhs) adj.
full of scorn; full of contempt; disdainful
• Ramses II was contemptuous of Moses’ attempt to free his people (at least in the Charlton Heston version of The Ten Commandments). • Marie Antoinette was contemptuous of the French peasants’ being unable to afford bread when she remarked, “. . . then let them eat cake.”
[-ly adv., -ness n.
contentment (kuhn TENT mint) n.
a feeling of being satisfied; a feeling of well-being
• Dinner having been finished, Gerald felt total contentment. • Her life being one of complete contentment, Susan had no desire for anything she did not already have.
context (KON tekst) n.
1. the spoken or written information immediately around a certain word or passage that helps to determine its meaning; 2. the entirety of the situation in which an event occurs
• Quoting her out of context, one might believe that Margaret had found a dress to be particularly lovely, while what she had actually said was “I don’t find that dress to be particularly lovely.” • To appreciate the significance of the latest explorations of Mars, we must look at it in the context of our exploration of the entire solar system.
[-ual adj., -ually adv.] contract (KON trakt for n. and sometimes v., kuhn TRAKT for most v.) n. 1. an agreement between two or more parties to do something in exchange for something else; 2. a formal agreement of marriage or engagement; 3. the document detailing the terms of the agreement —vt. 1. to arrange or agree to do something; 2. to get or incur (a debt, an illness, etc.); 3. to get or make smaller; to shorten; to narrow; to shrink; 4. to restrict • I just made a contract with a flooring company to replace that seedy looking living-room floor. • Wedding contracts are really obsolete in the twenty-first century. • Keep a copy of the contract in your desk or filing cabinet. • Lynn’s going to contract for new kitchen cabinets. • Olga seems to have contracted a nasty case of the flu. • It would be good to contract the size of your debt. • Regulations have contracted the number of people allowed to be in airline waiting rooms. [Syn. shrink, deflate, reduce]
contrary (KON tre ree) adj.
1. opposed to; against; 2. opposite in nature, order, direction, etc.; completely different; 3. posturing oneself to consistently disagree; perverse —n. the opposite
• Democrats and Republicans have contrary positions on many issues. • Contrary to popular opinion, Calbert can dance quite well. • Carla is disagreeing with everything just to be contrary. • George often says one thing and then does the contrary. contrast (KON trast for n., kun TRAST for v.) vt. to compare so as to notice or point out the differences; to make a side-by-side comparison —vi. to show differences when compared —n. 1. a difference, especially a striking one, between two things; 2. showing a striking difference, in color or tone, between different parts of a painting, photograph, or video image • It’s easy to contrast Hal’s easygoing mannerisms with R. Lee’s drill-sergeant demeanor. • Contrast the appearance of a 10-karat-yellow gold ring to a 14-karat one, and the difference is immediately obvious.• Look at a rectangle next to another parallelogram, and you will immediately recognize the contrast. • Adjusting the contrast on a television will soften or harden the way objects next to each other are differentiated.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. compare]
contribute (kun TRIB yoot) vt.
1. to give to a common fund or cause; 2. to write and give or sell a piece of writing to a magazine, newspaper, or other publication; 3. to furnish or donate knowledge, ideas, expertise, etc.
• Pat always contributes to cancer-fighting organizations. • James Thurber contributed many humorous cartoons and short stories to various editors during his lifetime. • Many scientists of the Manhattan Project contributed the ideas and calculations that led to Robert Oppenheimer’s becoming the father of the atomic bomb.
[-d, contributing, contribution n.]
contrite (kun TRYT) adj.
1. feeling sorrow; remorse; 2. showing or resulting from repentance; regretting having done wrong
• Kathy was contrite for having taken Rhoda’s car without first having gotten permission. • Bob’s avoiding meeting Gary’s eyes after having damaged his boat was the result of his feeling contrite.
[-ly adv., contrition n.] [Syn. penitent]
controversial (KON truh VER shee uhl) adj.
subject to or likely to cause disagreement; debatable
• The question of whether or not to build a new parking garage was the most controversial subject on the agenda. • Controversial topics are often the subject of public debate and can polarize opinions.
[-ly adv., controversy n.]
controvert (KON truh voert) vt.
1. to argue against; dispute; deny; contradict; 2. to argue about; debate; discuss
• It is becoming increasingly difficult to controvert the notion that life might have once existed on Mars. • Magellan’s voyage should have been enough to controvert all notions of the world’s being flat.
[-ed, -ing, -ible adj., -ibly adv.] [Syn. disprove]
conundrum (kuh NUHN drm) n.
1. a riddle in which the answer contains a pun (play on words); 2. any puzzling question or problem A conundrum’s sense #1 is illustrated in the following Q & A: Q. What’s the difference between a jeweler and a jailer? A. One sells watches, and the other watches cells.
• Having been invited to three different New Year’s Eve parties, and not wanting to hurt anyone’s feelings, Olive felt that deciding how to act was a conundrum.convergence* (kuhn VOER jins) n. 1. a coming together; 2. the point at which things come together • The convergence of Donna’s and Flo’s musical interests convinced them that they might make it as a duo. • There is a convergence of two roads into a single road that takes place at the fork.
[convergency n., convergent adj.]
conversation (KON ver SAY shin) n.
1. the act or a case of talking together; familiar talk; verbal interchange of ideas, opinions, etc.; 2. an informal discussion on an area of common interest by two governments
• Ned and Fred had a conversation over coffee, discussing where to get their motorcycles serviced. • It was customary at Vanessa’s workplace to discuss plans for the weekend during the water-cooler conversations. • Representatives of Russia and Japan have conversations now and again over Russia’s returning Sakhalin to Japan.
[-al adj., -ally adv.
convey (kuhn VAY) vt.
1. to carry from one place to another; transport; 2. to act as a channel or medium for; 3. to make known; 4. to transfer (property) from one person to another
• The van conveyed Gerri’s furniture to her new home. • Kaj asked Al to convey his condolences to Cindy. • Lisa conveyed her displeasure to Michael with a scowl. • The deed conveyed title to the lot from Sally to Harry.
[-ed, -ing, -able adj.] [Syn. carry] conviction* (kuhn VIK shin) n. 1. the finding that a person is guilty of a crime; 2. the appearance or reality of being convinced; 3. a strong belief • The criminal’s conviction was for shoplifting. • Jill told with conviction of her and Jack’s tumble on the hill. • The mayor expressed belief in his programs for urban renewal with conviction. [Syn. certainty, opinion] coop* (KOOP) n. 1. a small cage, pen, or building for keeping poultry; 2. any place of confinement; (slang) a jail —vt. to confine as in a coop (usually with up) —vi. (slang) to sleep on the job; (slang) to get away, as from a jail (as in fly the coop) • Some of the chickens have gotten out of the coop. • Because she was grounded, Olivia felt like she was in a coop. • Keep the puppies cooped up in your room so that they don’t get into mischief. • Night watchmen need to punch time clocks periodically so that their supervisors know they haven’t been cooping. [-ed, -ing] corroborate* (kur AHB ir AYT) vt. to back up the correctness of; to confirm; to support; to bolster • Willa corroborated Kim’s location at the time in question. • A second expert will corroborate the authenticity of the Picasso lithograph. [-d, corroborating, corroborative adj., corroboratory adj.] [Syn. confirm]
cosmopolitan (KAHZ muh PAH li tn) adj.
1. representative of a wide area of the world; not local or provincial; 2. not bound by local habits, likes, or dislikes; 3. embodying worldly sophistication; fashionable; urbane
• Max’s world travels have given him a cosmopolitan outlook. • A taste for Maryland crab cakes has had a cosmopolitan impact, drawing orders from all over the world to packers on the Chesapeake Bay. • The typical European capital city dweller is likely to have a more cosmopolitan view of things than his or her compatriot farmer.
couch (KOWCH) vt.
1. to lower or bring down, especially to lower (a spear, lance, etc.) to attack position; 2. to put in certain or specific words or phrases; express
• The knight couched his lance as he prepared to enter the lists and join the joust. (There’s a sentence you’ll use every day!) • The general’s warning was couched in barely veiled threats. • The poet’s images were couched in flowery language.
[-ed, -ing
counterfeit (KOWN toer fit) adj.
1. imitation of something real to deceive or defraud; 2. not genuine; sham; feigned —n. a copy made to purposely deceive; forgery; —vt. 1. to make an imitation of (money, pictures, etc.) usually to deceive or defraud; 2. to pretend; feign
• The counterfeit Van Gogh you bought yesterday for $40 is very well done but definitely not rare. • Counterfeit money in circulation is a danger to everyone in the country— including the counterfeiter. • That counterfeit was made to deceive you into believing it was a Tiffany lamp. (Just trying to throw some light on it.) • It is not a good idea to counterfeit U.S. currency. • One counterfeit most people are familiar with is alligator tears, produced when someone pretends to cry.
[-ed, -ing, counterfeiter n.] [Syn. false, artificial]
courage (KUR ij) n.
the attitude of confronting something acknowledged as difficult, painful, or dangerous, rather than running or hiding from it; the quality of bravery; fearlessness; valor
• Having the courage of one’s convictions means being brave enough to do what one believes is the right thing. • When faced with a potential attack by the vicious cat, Willis the Pug exhibited great courage.
[-ous adj., -ously adv., -ousness n.]
creation (kree AY shin) n.
1. a coming into existence or a causing to come into existence; 2. the whole universe; all the world; 3. anything created, especially something original created by the imagination; invention, design, etc.
• Gino is the creation of his parents, Melissa and Gennaro. • One’s creation can be figured from the time of conception. • You are the most important person in all creation. • The creations of DaVinci’s mind were ahead of their time.
creative (kree AY tiv) adj.
1. able to invent or discover; 2. possessing or showing artistic or intellectual inventiveness or imagination; 3. stimulating the imagination and inventiveness; 4. imaginatively deceptive
• The plan was the result of the general’s creative powers. • The architect made a very creative use of available space. • The music of Mozart often helps to get one’s creative juices flowing. • The deception was accomplished through the firm’s use of creative accounting.
creature (KREE chir) n.
1. anything created, whether animate or inanimate; 2. a living thing; a human being (often used in a patronizing, demeaning, or endearing manner); 3. one totally dominated by or depending on another
• Muppets are creatures animated by puppeteers. • A creature widely admired for its beauty is the wild horse. • Danielle was predictable, being a creature of habit. • Henry is such a sweet creature, one can’t help but like him. • Drug addicts are creatures of their addictions
crisis (KRY sis) n.
1. the turning point of an illness for better or for worse; 2. a very painful attack of illness; 3. a decisive, crucial time in the course of anything; a turning point; 4. a time of great danger or trouble
• Alessandra’s fever declined after the crisis had passed. • The doctor could tell that Dylan was in crisis by the pained expression on his face. • The battle’s crisis came when the enemy turned and fled. • September 11 has played a significant role in more than one crisis.
[crises pl.] [Syn. emergency
critic (KRIT ik) n.
1. someone who makes judgments of people or things based on certain standards; 2. such a person whose occupation is to write or broadcast such judgments of books, music, paintings, etc.; 3. a person who indulges in finding fault with everything
• Critics help to maintain high standards in many fields. • Checking what trusted movie critics have to say is one way to keep from wasting hard-earned money on fluff. • My mother was a critic, finding fault with almost everything I ever did— but she meant well
critical (KRI ti kuhl) adj.
1. inclined to find fault; censorious; 2. characterized by close dissection, analysis, and judgment; 3. of critics or criticism; 4. decisive; 5. dangerous or risky
• A teacher’s job is to be critical of his/her students’ work. • A critical study of the factory plans found flaws in them. • The critical community was wowed by your performance. • This military situation calls for immediate critical action. • Following the surgery, Miranda was in critical condition.
[-ly adv.]
criticism (KRIT I si zim) n.
1. the act of judging; analyzing qualities and comparing relative worth; 2. a review, comment, article, etc. expressing an evaluation; 3. the act of finding fault; censure; disapproval
• Criticism of the merits of the two teams left no doubt that the Yankees were superior to the 7th Grade Allstars. • A criticism of current investment strategies appeared in yesterday’s Wall Street Journal. • Judge Maxine’s ruling in the dog-bite case drew much criticism.
criticize (KRIT i SYZ) vi.
 vt. 1. to evaluate as a critic; 2. to judge disapprovingly; to find fault with
• Reporters from all media came early to get the opportunity to view and to criticize the new Egyptology exhibit. • Given the ballplayer’s haughty attitude, it was not surprising that the local fans took the opportunity to criticize every imperfect move that he made.
[-d, criticizing]
crucial (KROO shil) adj.
1. of extreme importance; decisive; critical; 2. (medicine) in the form of a cross At the first sign of a tick, Lois made the crucial decision to take her German shepherd, Libby, to the vet. Vince’s appendectomy scar was crucial, like the letter x. [-ly adv.] [Syn. acute] cultural* (KUL choer il) adj. 1. relating to culture (developing, improving, and refining the arts, intellect, interests, tastes, skills, etc.); 2. pertaining to a certain culture; 3. gotten by breeding or cultivation
• Gracie decided to get tickets to the Philharmonic as part of her concerted effort at cultural self-improvement. • A fondness for drinking ouzo is a Greek cultural thing. • The “jug” is a cultural phenomenon obtained by crossing a pug with a Jack Russell terrier. curator* (KYUR ay ter) n. 1. someone in charge of a museum, library, etc.; 2. a guardian or caretaker, as of a minor • The curator of documents is in charge of the archives. • Bruce Wayne is Dick Grayson’s curator, in an artful way
curiosity (KYUR ee ahs i tee) n.
1. a wanting to learn or know; 2. a wish to learn about things that don’t normally concern one; inquisitiveness; 3. anything curious, strange, rare, or novel
• Children often show curiosity about where they came from. • Spies tried not to openly show curiosity about factories. • The armadillo is certainly as much of a curiosity as the duck-billed platypus.
current (KOER int) adj.
1. taking place now; at the present time; contemporary; 2. passing from person to person; 3. commonly used, known, or accepted —n. 1. a flow of water or air in a certain direction; 2. a general flow or drift; course
• The current weather report is for a pleasant, sunny day. • The current rumor has Anne and Fred romantically linked. • To call something cool is no longer current, and I’m cool with that. • The river’s current carried the swimmer rapidly along. • When it comes to whom to invite to a party, I go with the current of this year’s crop.
curtail (KOER tayl) vt.
to cut short; reduce; abridge
• The urgent call caused me to curtail my visit to the park. • You must curtail your planned two-hour welcoming speech.
[-ed, -ing, -ment n.] [Syn. shorten]
custom (KUHS tim) n.
1. a usual practice or accepted way of behaving; habit; 2. a social tradition passed on through generations and upheld by social disaproval; those traditions, collectively; 3. duties and taxes imposed on imports —adj. 1. made, cooked, or done to order; 2. making things to order or dealing in things that are made to order
• It is Neal’s custom to always shower before shaving. • Not eating bread is one custom of the Passover holiday. • Not eating during daytime is a custom during Ramadan. • When we impose customs on imports, reciprocal taxes usually follow on our exports. • I’m going to buy a custom luxury car next month or as soon as I have a half-million dollars to spare—whichever comes last. • Custom kitchens are Gloria and Jeff’s specialty.
cynical (SIN ik uhl) adj.
1. believing that all personal actions are motivated by selfishness; 2. sarcastic, sneering, etc.
• When Geraldine heard that the car company had donated 30 uniforms to her soccer team, she was cynical, and she was proven correct when each donated uniform had the car company’s logo sewn onto it. • Max had a cynical view toward all apparent good deeds, just like his mother did.
[-ly adv.]
cynicism (SIN i SI zm) n.
1. attitudes or beliefs of a cynical person; 2. a cynical remark, idea, or action
• Karl greeted the ad for a complete oil change for $10 with considerable cynicism, wondering what the catch was. • Cynicism is a lot like skepticism, which means that if something sounds too good to be true, the odds are that it is
damage (DAM ij) n.
1. injury or harm, resulting in a loss of soundness or value; 2. (pl.) (law) money claimed by or ordered paid to a person to compensate for injury or loss —vt. to do harm to —vi. to incur harm
• Marla received damage to her neck when she skied off the main slope and into a nearby compost heap. • Claiming that the compost heap should not have been so close to the slope, Marla sued the ski lodge for damages. • When he hit the lamppost, Jakob damaged his tricycle. • Freddy’s ear was damaged when the newspaper carrier hit it with the Sunday paper.
[-d, damaging] [Syn. injure]
daze (DAYZ) vt.
1. to stun, stupefy, or bewilder as by a shock or blow to the head; 2. to dazzle —n. a stunned condition
• The bright headlamps dazed the deer as she momentarily froze in her tracks. • Bumping his head dazed Ian just long enough to permit his prisoner to slip away unnoticed. • After having survived frightful conditions while marooned on the island, the newly rescued sailor wandered around in a daze.
[-dly adv.]
debacle (di BAK il) n.
1. a torrent of debris-filled waters; 2. an overwhelming defeat or route; 3. a total, often ludicrous, collapse or failure
• After the dam burst, a debacle descended on the farms and villages below. • Napoleon never recovered from his Battle of Waterloo debacle. • The Bible tells of the debacle that resulted from man’s attempt to build the Tower of Babel.
debatable (di BAYT i bl) adj.
1. arguable, having pros and cons on both sides; 2. something that can be questioned or disputed; 3. in dispute, as land claimed by two countries
• Whether the country’s economy does better under Republicans or Democrats is highly debatable. • Whether the next Oscar really will go to the best picture of this year is debatable. • The ownership of Kashmir is debatable because it is claimed by both India and Pakistan.
debunk (di BUHNK) vt.
to expose the false or exaggerated claims, pretensions, glamour, etc. of con artists and charlatans
• Some people take it as their life’s work to debunk the schemes of con artists. • The self-proclaimed Great Randi has debunked many so-called mentalists by revealing their deceptions.
[-ed, -ing, -er n.
deceive (di SEEV) vt.
to cause (a person) to believe what is not true; delude; mislead —vi. to use deceit; lie
• Flattery is a time-tested device to deceive one into thinking he or she is hotter than is actually the case. • The Flyby Knight Furniture Company tried to deceive people into believing that their $298 sofa was real leather. • False advertising is intended to deceive.
[-d, deceiving, deceivable adj., deceivingly adv., -r n.]
decibel (DE si bil) n.
1. (acoustics) a numerical expression of the relative loudness of a sound; 2. (electronics, radio) a numerical expression of relative power levels of electronic signals (In both cases the decibel level [dB] is related to common logarithms, so small differences in decibels denote large differences in levels.)
• A 115-decibel sound level at a rock concert is enough to cause permanent hearing damage, while a 130-decibel sound can cause actual physical pain. • Loss of electromagnetic energy as it passes through transmission lines is measured in decibels, with a loss of 3 dBs equal to half the strength.
decline (di KLYN) vt.
 vi. 1. to slope downward or aside; 2. to sink; wane; near the end; 3. to lessen in force, health, value, etc.; 4. to sink to behavior that is base or immoral; 5. to refuse to accept
• The graph of violent crimes per capita in New York during the 1990s declines as it moves from left to right. • As it approaches the loading platform, the speed of the roller coaster declines. • The value of the dollar against the Euro declined in 2003. • In dealing with a monkey, you need not decline to its level. • Karen declined payment from Barney for having baby-sat.
[-d, declining] [Syn. refuse]
decorous (di KAW ris) adj.
characterized by or showing propriety in behavior, dress, etc.; demonstrating good taste
• Tom behaved in a very decorous manner at the graduation, never raising his voice or wiping his mouth on his sleeve. • The ettiquette consultant was hired by Maxine’s mother to supervise the decorous behavior of all the servers at the wedding reception.
[-ly adv.]
defend (dif END) vt.
1. to protect from attack; keep from harm or danger; 2. to support, maintain, or justify; 3. (law) to oppose (an action); to plead (one’s case)
• Though the door is unlocked, a German shepherd in the living room is usually adequate to defend a home from theft. • I don’t need to defend my conduct in this case. • The corporation had more than one attorney to defend it against liability actions.
[-ed, -ing, defense n., adj.]
deferment (di FOER mint) n.
a postponement; a putting off to a later time
• In the bad old days of the draft, college students were able to get deferments until after graduation. • Deferment of jury duty is often obtainable by mothers of preschool children.
[(to) defer vt.
defiant (di FY int) adj.
full of angry resistance; openly and boldly resisting (in spite of opposition)
• The men defending the Alamo were defiant in the face of Santa Ana’s overwhelmingly superior numbers. • Rosa Parks sparked civil rights awareness by being defiant of the “Blacks ride in the back” convention of the day.
[-ly adv., defiance n.]
deficit (DEF i sit) n.
the amount of money less than the necessary amount; having more liabilities than assets, losses than profits, or expenditures than income
• The U.S. government almost always has a financial deficit. • Those in the high-tech sector of the stock market experienced a severe deficit at the opening of the twenty-first century.
define (di FYN) vt.
1. to state or set down the boundaries of; to delineate; 2. to determine or state the nature or extent of; 3. to differentiate; 4. to state the meaning or meanings of a word (like we’re doing here)
• A couple needs to define what will be expected of each before rushing blindly into a marriage. • Mr. Smedley, our head of sales, will now define what your job here will be. • Never define a word by using that word in the definition.
[-d, defining, definition n.]
deleterious (DEL it ir ee uhss) adj.
bad for health or well-being; injurious; harmful
• Smoking cigarettes is deleterious to everyone’s health, not just the smoker’s. • An infestation of locusts can have a deleterious effect on a farmer’s crops.
[-ly adv., -ness n.] [Syn. pernicious
demagogue (DEM uh GOG) n.
one who tries to rouse the people by appealing to emotion, prejudice, etc. to win them over and attain (political) power
• Hitler was the most infamous demagogue of the twentieth century. • Stalin was a terrible dictator, but he does not qualify as a demagogue because he gained power by brute force alone.
[demagogy, -ry n.]
demeanor (di MEEN oer) n.
outward manner; carriage; the way one behaves
• Princess Diana had a regal demeanor and a gentle one. • Between a Rottweiler and a Doberman pinscher, the Rottie has the meaner demeanor.
[Brit. sp. demeanour] [Syn. bearing]
democracy (di MAHK ri see) n.
1. government by the people, with the populace holding the reins of power, either directly or through elected representatives; power in the hands of the ruled; 2. a country, state, etc. with that type of government; 3. majority rule; 4. the principle of equal rights and opportunities for all, and equal treatment by the legal system; the practice of these principles
• Athens had the first experiment in democracy we know of. • American democracy was not viewed kindly by the crowned heads of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europe. • India is the world’s largest democracy in terms of population. • Schoolchildren learn the principles of democracy by voting for class officers (who have little to no power). • The U.S. Constitution is the primary legal document that assures the principles of democracy be followed.
demonstrate (DEM uhn STRAYT) vt.
1. to prove; show by reasoning; 2. to make clear or explain through examples, experiments, etc.; 3. to show how a product works or what it tastes like in order to sell it; 4. to show feelings plainly
• Descartes was the first philosopher to demonstrate his existence by the dictum, “I think, therefore I am.” • The operation of the steam engine is often demonstrated in classes using a cutaway working model. • There are often people demonstrating certain foods at the warehouse club by offering free samples in small cups. • Tears on her cheek demonstrated Patricia’s sadness.
[-d, demonstrating] denounce* (di NOWNS) vt. 1. to condemn publicly; inform against; 2. to accuse of being evil; 3. to give formal notice of the termination of (a treaty, armistice, etc.) • American loyalists denounced Washington as a traitor to the British Crown. • The French patriots denounced Louis XVI as a tyrant. • The Japanese government did not denounce the naval treaty that limited the size and number of warships they could build; they just disregarded it. [-d, denouncing] [Syn. criticize]
deny (di NY) vt.
1. to declare something untrue; contradict; 2. to not accept as factual; to reject as unfounded, unreal, etc.; 3. to disown; to refuse to acknowledge as one’s own; rerepudiate; 4. to not allow the use of or access to; 5. refuse to grant or give; 6. to refuse a person’s reques
• Cara denied the charge that she had cheated on her diet. • Evan did not deny having cheated on Mary but claimed that she had cheated on him first. • Ian denied having painted the big mural outside the store. • Ryan was forced to deny Sophie use of the handicapped parking space on the grounds that she wasn’t handicapped. • I deny all of you access to the ice cream in my freezer. • I also must deny your request for parole.
[denied, -ing, denial n.]
depict (di PIKT) vt.
1. to portray; to represent in a painting, drawing, sculpture, etc.; 2. to describe; to picture in words
• Leonardo DaVinci’s Last Supper depicts a Passover seder. • A portrait artist will depict a likeness of you, for a fee. • The sports section of today’s newspaper depicts a detailed account of yesterday’s games, artfully drawn in words.
[-ed, -ing, -ion n.]
deplore (di PLAWR) vt.
1. to be sorry about; to regret; lament; 2. to regard as unfortunate or awful; 3. to disapprove of; to condemn as wrong
• My neighbor’s mother deplores the day he was born. • Any feeling individual must deplore the conditions in which the urban homeless are condemned to live. • The whole world deplores the lack of safety measures that were in place at Chernobyl’s nuclear power plant.
[-d, deploring
deride (di RYD) vt.
to laugh at contemptuously or scornfully; to make fun of; ridicule
• Jack derided his sister for having trouble riding the bicycle. • It is poor form to deride anyone for his or her handicaps or inabilities.
[-d, deriding, derision n., derisive adj., deridingly adv.] [Syn. ridicule] derivative* (di RIV a TIV) adj. 1. using or taken from other sources; 2. not original —n. something derived • Many modern medicines are tropical plant derivatives. • The Lord of the Rings movies were derivative films, having been taken from Tolkein’s writings. • Chocolate is a derivative of the cacao bean. [-ly adv.]
derive (di RYV) vt.
1. to get, take, or receive something from a source; 2. to arrive at by reasoning; deduce or infer; 3. to trace to or from its source; show the origin and development of
• Alice derived most of her term paper from Web sources. • Pythagoras derived his famous theorem by drawing squares on the sides of a right triangle and relating their areas. • The ancestry of many immigrants may be derived from the archives at Ellis Island.
[-d, deriving, derivation n.]
descent (dee SENT) n.
1. a coming or going down; 2. lineage; ancestry; 3. a downward slope; 4. a sudden attack or raid (on or upon); 5. a decline; fall
• Wally’s descent down the banister was much faster than it would have been had he used the stairs. • Jack could trace his descent from a long line of no-good Nicks. • The ski trail made a steep descent before leveling off. • The Mongols’ descent upon the caravan came swiftly and without warning. • The power of the Egyptian pharoahs was in descent long before the reign of the last pharoah, Cleopatra.
describe (di SKRYB) vt.
1. to give a detailed account of; 2. to make a word picture of; 3. to trace or outline
• Lewis Carrol describes Alice’s adventures in Wonderland as growing “curiouser and curiouser.” • Ernest Hemingway was able to describe places in words so that exotic, detailed pictures formed in his readers’ minds. • Valerie used her compass to describe a 3 cm radius circle.
[-d, describing]
description (dis KRIP shin) n.
1. the process of picturing in words; describing; 2. a statement or passage that describes; 3. sort, kind, or variety of; 4. the act of tracing or outlining
• James Michener’s description of the islands of the South Pacific were vivid enough to transport the reader there. • Write a brief description of the accident and how you caused it to happen.• There are coffee beans of every description that are grown in South America, Africa, and other places. • Hal’s arm swept through the description of a 90° arc.
design (di ZYN) vt.
1. to make creative sketches of; to plan; 2. to plan and carry out; 3. to form (plans) in the mind; to contrive; 4. to intend; purpose —n. 1. a plan, scheme, or project; 2. an aim or purpose; 3. a thing planned for or a result aimed at; 4. the organization of parts, details, form, color, etc. to get an artistic result
• The architect designed the floor plan on a large sketch pad. • It is hard to design a foolproof bank holdup, and he or she who thinks otherwise is a fool. • Martha tried to design a plan of study that would help her get ready for the math examination. • Bob designed to work straight through until dinner. • The design of the house was Tara’s own. • Jason built the plane from a commercial design. • The wedding reception went off according to design. • We should lay out the design for the painting before actually working on the canvas.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. intend, plan] desolate (DES uh lit for adj., DES uh LAYT for v.) adj. 1. isolated; lonely; solitary; 2. uninhabited; deserted; 3. made uninhabitable; in a ruined condition; 4. forlorn; wretched —vt. 1. to rid of inhabitants; 2. to make uninhabitable; to devastate; 3. to forsake; abandon; 4. to make wretched, forlorn, etc. • Ed has been desolate since Trixie took his teddy bear. • The desert island was a desolate place. • The nuclear tests had left the land in a desolate state. • The naval gunnery practice range was desolated by its almost constant bombardment. • You’ll desolate me if you run away with my best friend without giving me at least 10 days’ notice so that I can replace you. [-d, desolating, -ly adv.]
despise (dis PYZ) vt.
1. to detest; to look on with contempt and scorn; 2. to regard with dislike or repugnance
• The cowboys learned to despise the scorpions that crawled into their boots at night. • They also despised eating pork and beans night after night.
[-d, despising] [Syn. scorn, disdain]
destitution (DES ti TOO shin) n.
the state of being very poor; being without; lacking the necessities of life; abject poverty
• Destitution is a condition in which it is unenviable to find oneself. • Do not confuse destitution, a state of abject poverty, with restitution, a paying back for injuries caused.
[Syn. poverty
destruction (dis TRUHK shin) n.
1. demolition; the act of destroying; slaughter; 2. the fact or state of being demolished; 3. the cause or means of demolition
• Peter’s task was to effect the destruction of the old ballpark so that it could be replaced with a new one. • The tornado had caused almost complete destruction where it had touched down. • Destruction is a good thing, when practiced in moderation.
[Syn. ruin]
detachment (di TACH mint) n.
1. a separating; 2. a unit of troops separated from a larger unit for special duty; a small permanent unit organized for special service; 3. the state of being disinterested, impartial, or aloof
• The shipping container was a detachment from a long-haul tractor-trailer’s bed. • A detatchment of marines was sent in to reconnoiter before the main landing was to take place. • The cat watched the dog being bathed with complete detachment, having no clue that she was to be next
determine (di TOER min) vt.
1. to set limits to; to bound; define; 2. to settle a dispute, question, etc.; to decide; 3. to come to a conclusion; 4. to assign direction to
• A chain-link fence determines the boundaries of many city playgrounds. • A meeting between the two contenders should determine once and for all the true heavyweight champion. • The jury has to determine whether the defendant is innocent, or guilty as charged. • The prevailing winds will determine where the balloon goes.
[-d, determining] [Syn. decide, learn]
detract (dee TRAKT) vt.
1. to take or draw away (from); 2. to belittle; disparage —vi. to remove something desirable (from)
• We must not detract strength from his argument. • Do not detract the importance of following one’s heart. • Frowning detracts from her beauty.
[-ed, -ing, -or n.]
development (di VEL uhp mint) n.
1. a growing or expanding (in size, strength, etc.); 2. a step or stage in growth, advancement, etc.; 3. an event or an occurence; 4. a number of buildings on a large tract of land
• Ned’s development of his muscles is impressive. • Development of the Polaroid picture is easy to see, as the image gains in definition before your eyes. • What a revolting development this is! • The new housing development will occupy 40 acres.
[-al adj., -ally adv.]
diagnosis (DY uhg NOH sis) n.
1. the act of finding or classifying a condition by means of medical examination, lab tests, etc.; 2. a careful studying and analyzing of the facts to understand or explain something; 3. a decision or opinion based on such an analysis
• The diagnosis of strep infection came after the throat culture returned from the lab. • Before we can diagnose your business’s problems, we must analyze your clientele, your expenditures, and your suntan. • Steve’s diagnosis of the cause of the computer’s strange graphics was the Rhino virus, which put a horn on every image’s nose. digression* (dy GRESH in) n. 1. an act of straying from the main theme or idea when talking or writing; 2. a temporary straying from the main theme • During Bill’s discussion of bridge designing came a 10-minute-long digression about his love of chocolate milk. • Laura’s digression on her childhood was barely noticed by her art history students, most of whom were already asleep.
[(to) digress vi., -al adj.
dingy (DIN gee) adj.
1. yucky; dull; not clean; grimy; 2. ragged; gloomy
• If you don’t use chlorine bleach on your cotton whites, you’re likely to have them come out a dingy yellow. • Jane’s attempt to wangle an invitation to the party was rather dingy.
[dingily adv., dinginess n.]
discern (dis OERN) vt.
1. to clearly distinguish one thing from another or others; to recognize as distinct or separate; 2. to clearly make out
• It was not hard to discern the difference between the hearts and the spades in the deck of cards. • Terry discerned a feeling of approval rising from her captive audience.
[-ed, -ing, -able adj., -ably adv.] [Syn. perceive, distinguish] discordant* (dis KAWR dint) adj. 1. not in agreement; conflicting; 2. out of harmony; clashing; dissonant • The unhappy incoming news was discordant with the recipient’s more uplifting expectations. • A discordant note was struck by the politician addressing the labor union leadership. [discordance or discordancy n., -ly adv.] discount (DIS cownt for n., dis COWNT for v.) n. 1. money off the usual price; 2. a deduction from a debt allowed for paying it early or in cash; 3. the interest rate charged —vt. 1. to pay or get the present value of a note less the interest; 2. to subtract an amount or percent from (a bill, price, etc.); 3. to sell at less than the usual price; 4. to take a story, statement, opinion, etc. at less than face value, or to totally disregard it as exaggeration • Everything in the store was discounted 15%. • Many Treasury bonds are sold at a discounted rate to allow for the interest that will accrue between purchase and maturity. • Corporate bonds are often sold at a discount rate so that the purchaser pays less than the face value. • In certain furniture stores, the pieces are marked so that the customer can discount 50% to get the selling price. • The police officer discounted most of Denise’s story, which made her role look better than it actually was. [-ed, -ing] [Syn. reduction] discourse* (DIS kawrs) n. 1. exchange of ideas, information, etc. usually through talking; conversation; 2. a long, formal speech or essay on a subject; lecture; treatise; dissertation —vi. 1. to carry on a talk; confer; 2. to speak or write formally and at some length • The secretary of state gave a discourse on foreign policy. • The doctoral candidate’s dissertation was a discourse on the number of seeds that one might expect to find on various breeds of strawberries and why. • The two musicians discoursed with each other about the meaning of Beethoven’s notations in the margins of his pieces. • The president discoursed at some length about not knowing how the terrible economy could be fixed and about how it wasn’t his fault anyway. [-d, discoursing] [Syn. speak
discovery (dis KUH vir ee) n.
1. finding out about, seeing, or knowing about first; 2. making famous; bringing to the public’s attention; 3. pretrial procedures for compelling the disclosure of certain facts
• Jonas Salk’s discovery of a vaccine against polio put an end to the most feared infectious disease of the twentieth century. • The discovery of Lana Turner in Schwab’s drug store in Los Angeles is the stuff of which fairy tales are made. • All the evidence the prosecution has must be revealed to the defense during the discovery process.
[discoveries pl.] [Syn. learning] discredit* (dis KRED it) vt. 1. to reject as not true; to disbelieve; 2. to be a cause for disbelief or distrust; to cast doubt on; 3. to damage the reputation or credibility of; disgrace • The authorities discredited Marsha’s story about how she was abducted by little green creatures in a flying saucer. • The fact that he had been caught lying in three previous incidents discredited any further testimony he would give. • The story of how he had turned and run in a previous emergency discredited his standing as a local hero. [-ed, -ing
discretion (dis KRE shin) n.
1. the ability to decide or to choose; power to judge or act; 2. the quality of being careful about what one does or says; prudence
• You may pay by check or by cash, at your own discretion. • Karen snuck the chips and dip into her bedroom with discretion, so nobody could see she was deviating from her diet. discriminate (dis KRIM in ayt for v., dis KRIM in it for adj.) vt. 1. to recognize a difference between; differentiate; 2. to notice the difference between; to distinguish —vi. 1. to be discerning; 2. to treat differently; show partiality —adj. involving making distinctions; distinguishing carefully • Tax rates discriminate between married and single payers. • Ralph’s fingers were sensitive enough to discriminate between apples and pears by just touching their skins. • While shopping for credit terms, it pays to discriminate by comparing the terms very carefully. • The law discriminates between keeping domestic and wild animals as pets, generally prohibiting the latter. • When it comes to wine, Judy has very discriminating taste (among bottles costing $6 or less).
[-d, discriminating] [Syn. distinguish]
discussion (dis KUSH in) n.
talking or writing in which the pros and cons and/or various aspects of a subject are considered
• If you want to see the complete discussion that preceeded the passage of a law, read The Congressional Record. • It is important that you participate in a thorough discussion of current events before you decide for whom to vote. disdain* (dis DAYN) vt. to regard or treat someone/thing as beneath one’s dignity; to refuse or reject with aloofness and scorn; to show contempt for —n. the feeling, attitude, or expression of scornfulness; aloof contempt • The cat totally disdained the dog, who was content to lie on the hard floor rather than on the soft pile of laundry. • Gandhi might have disdained walking among the lowest caste of the Indian people, but he did not. • In some industries the white-collar workers foolishly look upon the bluecollar workers with disdain.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. despise]
disease (diz EEZ) n.
1. any varying from healthiness; illness in general; 2. a certain destructive process in an organ or organism rooted in a particular cause; ailment; 3. any harmful or destructive social condition
• At the first sign of disease, a doctor’s visit is a good idea. • Jaundice is only one of many diseases of the liver. • High unemployment is a disease that can cripple society.
disguise (dis GYZ) vt.
1. to make look, sound, etc. different from usual so as to be unrecognizable; 2. to hide or obscure the real nature of —n. 1. anything used to change one’s appearance, voice, etc.; 2. the state of being disguised; 3. the act or practice of disguising
• Red Chief’s kidnappers disguised their voices when they made ransom demands, never dreaming that the child’s parents would not want him back. • While disguised as a ghost, Shaila kept bumping into walls. • The bank robber was incorrect when he thought the Groucho Marx disguise would prevent his being recognized.
[-d, disguising]
disheveled (dis SHEV ild) adj.
sloppily dressed and untidy; sloppy; not neatly groomed; having wrinkled clothing, etc.
• Donna’s hair was quite disheveled, as if she had gotten up after a night’s tossing and turning and not brushed it. • Howard looked disheveled, as if he were wearing the clothes he had slept in.
disingenuous (DIS in JEN yoo uhs) adj.
not straightforward; not candid or frank; insincere
• Carrie was disingenuous, telling Kaj what she thought he wanted to hear just to get rid of him. • When Harry asked Sally why she had been late, her disingenuous answer included a story about a jacknifed tractor-trailer truck.
[-ness n., -ly adv.] disparage* (dis PA ridzh) vt. 1. to discredit; 2. to speak ill of; show disrespect for; to belittle • Walter disparaged his own reputation when he told the story of the time he had spent behind bars. • Don’t disparage me by talking about me behind my back. [-d, disparaging vt. or adj., disparagingly adv.]
disparate (dis PA rit) adj.
not alike; distinct or different in kind; unequal
• When Diane interviewed the brother and sister for the job, she spent a disparate amount of time with the brother. • Marty said the twins were as alike as peas in a pod, but to Jill they seemed as disparate as green beans and cantaloupes. disparity* (dis PA ri tee) n. 1. difference or inequality, as in rank, amount, quality, etc.; 2. unlikeness; incongruity • There is a disparity between a private’s and a general’s paycheck commensurate with that of their ranks. • There is a disparity in the areas of a triangle and a rectangle of equal base and height.
dispel (dis PEL) vt.
to drive away; scatter; make vanish; disperse
• When Kate saw Julio stand on his head while spinning two rings on each ankle, it was enough to dispel any doubt that he was the man for her. • The policemen’s presence helped to dispel the crowd.
[-led, -ling] [Syn. scatter]dispersal* (dis POER sil) n. 1. a scattering; a spreading about; 2. a breaking up of light into its component colored rays (by use of a triangular prism) • The spreader assured that the grass seeds would get a thorough dispersal. • When white light is passed through a prism, a dispersal occurs and the rays form the colors of the rainbow. • In fact, a real rainbow is caused by the dispersal of the sun’s rays by the water in the air. [Syn. scattering]
disregard (DIS ri GAHRD) vt.
1. to pay little or no attention to; 2. to not respect; slight —n. 1. lack of attention; neglect; 2. lack of respect
• Disregard that little man behind the curtain! (Where have we heard something like that before?) • It is important to never disregard the feelings of others. • When Frank painted his room, he treated his wife’s dislike of red with total disregard.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. neglect]
dissemble (dis EM bl) vt.
to hide beneath a false appearance; to disguise —vi. to hide the truth, or one’s true feelings, motives, etc. by pretending; to behave hypocritically
• Some guests feel it proper to dissemble their displeasure so as not to upset the host or hostess. • You want the truth? We have to dissemble our facts, for fear that you can’t handle the truth. • Gary dissembled his dislike for chocolate by asking for a second piece.
[-d, dissembling
disseminate (dis EM in AYT) vt.
to scatter far and wide; spread about, as if sowing seed; make known widely
• The newspaper’s purpose was to disseminate the ideas of its editorial staff over a wide region. • Maple seeds have sails so that they can be disseminated by air currents over a wide area.
[-d, disseminating] [Syn. broadcast, promulgate]
dissent (dis ENT) vi.
1. to have a different belief or opinion; disagree, often with from; 2. to reject the doctrine of an established religion —n. the act of disagreeing, specifically a legal opinion against the majority’s; religious nonconformity
• Bulls and bears dissent from one another in their stock purchase plans. • Henry VIII’s dissent with the pope caused the formation of the Anglican Church. • Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. wrote some very famous dissents during his term on the Supreme Court.
[-ed, -ing]
dissimilar (dis SIM i loer) adj.
not alike; different
• Cats and dogs have very dissimilar personality traits, with the dog trying to please you and the cat believing it’s your job to please it. • Twins Bob and Ray have dissimilar jobs at the phone company; Bob’s in operations, and Ray’s an operator.
[-ity n., -ly adv.] [Syn. different]
dissipate (DIS i PAYT) vt.
1. to break up and scatter; dispel; disperse; 2. to drive completely away; make disappear; 3. to waste or squander
• The rising sun will help to dissipate the fog. • Of course, it won’t completely dissipate until the sun’s rays have had a chance to dry up all the water droplets. • Don’t dissipate all your energy looking for a leprechaun.
[-d, dissipating] [Syn. scatter] distinct* (dis TEENKT) adj. 1. not alike; different; 2. not the same; individual; separate; 3. clearly sensed or marked off; clear; plain; 4. well defined; unmistakable; definite • Each ballplayer is a distinct entity. • Every puppy in the litter has a distinct personality. • Every school bus has a distinct serial number. • Our effort brought a distinct success. [Syn. different]
distinguish (dis TING wish) vt.
1. to tell apart; to sense or show the difference in; to differentiate; 2. to be an essential feature of; characterize; 3. to separate and classify; 4. to make famous or prominent; give distinction to
• Rubies and sapphires can be easily distinguished from each other by color. • Hardness distinguishes real diamonds from fake ones. • The Dewey Decimal System helps us to distinguish a book by its cover. • “The distinguished senator from (your state)” is a title of rank and respect.
[-ed, -ing, -able adj., -ably adv.] [Syn. discriminate
distort (dis TAWRT) vt.
1. to twist out of shape; change the normal shape, form, or appearance of; 2. to misrepresent; misstate; pervert
• Rubber dolls and action figures are easy to distort. • Martin’s report on Korea seriously distorts the facts.
[-ed, -ing, -er n.] [Syn. deform] diversion* (di VER zhuhn) n. 1. a turning aside; 2. distraction of attention; 3. anything that distracts the attention, such as a pastime or an amusement • Diversion of the Colorado River through tunnels allowed the Hoover Dam to be built near Las Vegas. • The Japanese attacked the Aleutians in World War II as a diversion to draw America’s attention away from Midway. • Six Flags provides diversion at several amusement parks.
divination (DIV i NAY shun) n.
1. a trying to predict the future or examine the unknown by means beyond human understanding; 2. a prophecy; prediction; foreknowing; 3. a correct guess or good intuition
• Divination was often used in the Old West to decide where to dig wells for water. • Nostradamus’s stock and trade was divination. • One who succeeds in divination is often referred to as a lucky guesser. • Divination is ESP (not ESPN)
divisive (di VYS iv or di VIS iv) adj.
causing division, especially causing disagreement or dissension
• Whether or not to get a second dog was a divisive issue for Lois and Jeremy. • Which bills should be paid first is often a divisive matter for newlyweds and longtime couples alike.
divulge (div UHLDZH) vt.
to make known; disclose; unveil; reveal
• The newspaper reporter was obliged to not divulge the source of his highly sensitive information. • If I were to divulge to you the secret processes that were involved in the making of this product, I’d have to shoot you.
[-d, divulging] [Syn. reveal]
domestic (duh MES tik) adj.
1. having to do with the home, housekeeping, or family; 2. of one’s own country, or the country referred to; 3. made or produced in the home country; 4. tame —n. 1. a houseworker such as a maid, housekeeper, or butler; 2. blankets, linens, towels, etc.
• Domestic tasks, which used to be exclusively a woman’s, are shared by both men and women in modern homes. • Domestic receipts for many Hollywood movies are exceeded by overseas receipts. • Some very fine domestic wines are produced in California, Washington, and New York. • Nora worked as a domestic in the home of a Hollywood actress. • The cardboard box in the attic contained old sheets, towels, blankets, canning jars, and other domestics.
[domestically adv.] dominance* (DAHM in ins) n. controlling or being in control; authority • About 90% of all people show dominance of the right hand. • In a pride of lions, dominance is usually exhibited by the largest male member of the group.
dominant (DAHM in uhnt) adj.
exercising authority or influence; ruling; prevailing; controlling
• While it was a close call, the dominant political party in twentieth-century U.S. presidential politics was Republican. • The dominant grape variety in the Bordeaux region of France is the cabernet sauvignon. • The New York Yankees is the dominant professional baseball team of all time.
[Syn. preeminent]
donation (doh NAY shin) n.
1. the act of giving; 2. a gift or contribution to a charitable organization
• Donations of usable clothing are always helpful. • Maribel always makes a donation to the Lung Association. • Donations to the March of Dimes led to a vaccine for polio.
[Syn. present
draft (DRAFT) n.
1. a drawing or pulling of a vehicle or load; 2. a taking of liquid into the mouth; drinking; 3. a rough or preliminary sketch of an artwork or a piece of writing; 4. an air current in a room; 5. the choosing of an individual for some specific purpose —vt. to do any of the above —adj. used for any of the above
• Clydesdale horses are used for draft, not for riding. • Nora took a draft from her glass of root beer. • Shakespeare wrote drafts of all his plays, over and over. • Do you feel a draft in here? • George answered his party’s draft to run for office.
[-ed, -ing; draught, British spelling]
drub (DRUHB) vt.
1. to beat, as with a stick or club; thrash; 2. to defeat soundly in a fight, contest, etc.
• The tried-and-true way of cleaning a rug in the nineteenth century was to hang it over a rope and drub it with all your might. • The Mets were given an eight-to-one drubbing by the Braves.
[-bed, -bing] [Syn. thrash]
duplicity (doo PLIS i tee) n.
double-dealing; hypocritical cunning or deception
• The Greek army was able to take Troy by the duplicity of hiding soldiers in the statue of a horse. • Most dictators stay in power through duplicity, making their people believe they’re doing other than they are.
[duplicitous adj., duplicitously adv.]
dwelling (DWEL ing) n.
residence; house; abode
• Some Native Americans lived in cliff dwellings. • Many southwestern dwellings are made of adobe—a kind of clay readily available there.eccentric* (ek SEN trik) adj. 1. not having the same center; 2. not exactly circular in shape or motion; 3. deviating from the norm, as in behavior; odd; unconventional • If one circle is drawn inside another and they are not concentric, they must be eccentric. • A football is of an eccentric shape. • Unless one who dresses in a red wig with matching suspenders and oversized shoes is a clown, he or she would have to be called more than a bit eccentric.
eclectic (ek LEK tik) adj.
1. taken from various sources, systems, or doctrines; 2. made up of materials gathered from many different sources, systems, etc.
• A good historian gathers his or her information from eclectic sources rather than just one. • Eclectic is the only way to describe the earliest computers, which were made from vacuum tubes and a variety of condensers and resistors. ecological* (ek uh LAH ji kl) adj. having to do with the relations between living things and their environment or a certain organism and its environment • The plants and animals that live in and around a pond have their own intertwined ecological subsystem. • Urban sprawl’s ecological impact can be clearly seen in the presence of deer and bears on suburban roadways.
economic (ek uh NAH mik) adj.
1. dealing with the management of income, expenditures, etc. of a household, business, community, or government; 2. concerning the production, distribution, and consumption of wealth; 3. concerned with the material needs of people; —pl. the social science that is concerned with the preceding
• The economic well-being of his or her household is a major concern to the head of any family. • The indices of economic indicators give a reading of how well the country’s economy is doing. • People’s main economic needs are as much as it takes for them to live comfortably. • Economics is the social science devoted to the study of supply and demand.
[-ally adv.]
ecstatic (ek STA tik) adj.
1. having the nature of being overpowered by joy, happiness, or rapture; 2. causing or caused by ecstasy
• Morissa was absolutely ecstatic over the raise in salary that she had received. • It was an ecstatic day for the world champions.
[-ally adv.
effect (uh FEKT) n.
1. something resulting from a cause; a result; 2. the ability to bring about results; 3. an influence or action on something —vt. to bring about; to produce as a result; to cause; to accomplish
• When someone tickles you, the effect is that you laugh. • Drinking too much can have the effect of making you light-headed. • The Kid has the talent and quickness to effect a knockout in three rounds.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. consequence, outcome; Ant. cause] effective* (uh FEK tiv) adj. 1. creating a result; 2. creating a definite or desired result; efficient; 3. in effect; operative; active; 4. actual, rather than potential or theoretical; 5. equipped and ready for combat • Winston Churchill was a very effective speaker. • Certain bug sprays are more effective than others. • The order to report is effective within 24 hours. • We will have an effective solution within the week. • The marines will have an effective force on the ground by the first of next month. [-ly adv.] efficacious* (EF I KAY shis) adj. capable of creating the desired result; actually creating that result; effective • Aspirin is an efficacious medication with many uses. [-ly adv.] [Syn. effective]
efficient (ef FISH int) adj.
using a minimum of effort, expense, or waste to cause a desired result with
• A diesel engine is much more efficient than a steam engine, even though diesel fuel is not clean burning. • When your desk is organized in an efficient manner, those things you use most often are the most accessible.
egregious (e GREE juhs) adj.
terrible; filled with undesirable qualities; amazingly bad; flagrant
• When the American people elected
[you fill in the name], they made an egregious error. • The dinner served on our flight from St. Louis was absolutely egregious. [-ly adv.] elated* (ee LAY tid) adj. very happy; joyful; filled with elation; high spirited • Terry was elated when he saw that his family had come to watch him play baseball. • Ian was elated at the sight of his grandma’s chocolate cream pies. [-ly adv.]
element (EL i mint) n.
1. the most basic (as-small-as-it-gets) part or principle of anything, whether concrete or abstract; 2. a component; a constituent; an ingredient; a factor; a building block
• There are 106 known chemical elements, of which 96 occur in nature. • Your argument seems to contain an element of truth. • Elements of the Eighth Army neared Baghdad
elicit (el IS it) vt.
1. to draw out; evoke; 2. to cause to be revealed
• Perry’s quiet manner was meant to elicit a confession. • She hoped to elicit a hint as to what her present might be. • The pitch was made to elicit enough sympathy to get a monetary contribution.
[-ed, -ing, -able adj., -ation n.]
elite (e LEET) n.
1. those selected or regarded as the finest, best, most distinguished, etc.; 2. a size of type for typewriters (remember them?) measuring 12 characters per inch —adj. of, forming, or suitable for elites
• The SEALS are the elite of the U.S. Navy. • The elite of the feline family is the Siberian tiger. • My old IBM Selectric II used courier (10 characters per inch) and elite (12 characters per inch) interchangable type balls. • The British Commandos are an elite group
elocution (EL i KYOO shin) n.
1. vocalizing words distinctly when speaking in public; 2. the art of public speaking or declaiming (now usually associated with a studied or artificial style)
• Cicero was well known for his elocution in the Senate of ancient Rome. • Proper elocution requires one to project from the diaphragm rather than just speaking with one’s voice. • Opera singers are often taught elocution.
[-ary adj., -ist n.] eloquent* (EL uh kwint) adj. 1. having a vivid, forceful, fluent, graceful, and persuasive quality of writing or speech; 2. vividly expressive • Mark Twain was an eloquent speaker as well as a humorous one. • Rachel shrugged and sighed an eloquent sigh. [-ly adv.]
elude (il OOD) vt.
1. to use quickness, cunning, etc. to avoid being captured; evade; 2. to escape detection, notice, or understanding
• The fox does not often elude detection by the hounds. • The prisoner eluded the guards by hiding in the laundry bin. • I recognize her face, but her name eludes me.
[-d, eluding] [Syn. escape] embellishment* (em BEL ish mint) n. 1. fancying up; 2. something that adorns, as an ornament, or a bit of fancifulness added to a factual account; a fancy musical phrase • Tree lights and icicles are often added as embellishments. • A good storyteller often adds a few embellishments, just to make his (or someone else’s) role appear more important. • William F. Cody’s (Buffalo Bill’s) autobiography has often been called one big embellishment from start to finish. • A rimshot on a snare drum accompanying a TV talk-show host’s punch line is an embellishment.
embitter (em BIT ir) vt.
1. to anger; make resentful or morose; 2. to make more bitter; exascerbate; aggravate
• Ignore his cynicism; he’s just an embittered old grouch. • Pulling her hair is bound to embitter her even further.
[-ed, -ing, -ment n.]
embrace (em BRAYS) vt.
1. to enfold in the arms, usually as an expression of affection or desire; to hug; 2. to accept readily; to avail oneself of; 3. to take up or adopt (especially eagerly or seriously); 4. to include; contain
• The homecoming sailor happily embraced his wife and child. • Phyllis embraced Cathy’s offer to help her with math. • Mr. Jones eagerly embraced his new profession. • The science of biology embraces zoology and botany.
[-d, embracing] [Syn. include
embroil (em BROYL) vt.
1. to mix things up; bungle; jumble; 2. to lure into a battle or fight; get into trouble
• His waffling on the subject served only to embroil matters. • The North and South were embroiled in the bloody Civil War.
[-ed, -ing, -ment n.]
emend (ee MEND) vt.
1. to make scholarly corrections or improvements to a text; 2. (rare) to correct or improve
• Loren had to emend the manuscript to take into account the latest information on the subject. • After finding errors, the author emended the text.
[-ed, -ing] emergence* (ee MOER jins) n. 1. a becoming visible; coming forth into view; a coming out; 2. an outgrowth from beneath the outer layer of a plant • The sudden emergence of the beluga whale from beneath the surface caught all the whale watchers by surprise. • The emergence of the sun from below the horizon is well worth getting up early to watch. • It took a few weeks before the emergence of the prickles on the rosebush.
emigrate (EM i grayt) vt.
to leave one country to settle down in another
• During the potato famine, many people emigrated from Ireland and came to the United States. • Albert Einstein emigrated to the United States from Germany.
[-d, emigrating] [Syn. migrate; Ant. immigrate]
eminent (EM in int) adj.
1. rising above other things or places, both literally and figuratively; high; lofty; 2. projecting; prominent; protruding; 3. standing high when compared to others, as in rank or achievement; renowned; exalted; distinguished
• The Matterhorn is an eminent peak in the Swiss Alps. • The office of U.S. senator is an eminent position. • George Patton was a general with eminent achievements.
[-ly adv., eminence n.] [Syn. famous]
emissary (EM is ery) n.
an agent of a government, a company, or an individual sent on a certain mission
• The Italian ambassador to the United Nations was sent as an emissary to the peace talks. • Although the United States was never a member of the League of Nations, our government sent an emissary there to look out for American interests.
[emissaries pl.
emollient (i MAHL yint) n.
something with a softening or soothing effect, especially a medicinal lotion applied to the skin of the body
• After a day outside, an emollient is helpful in combating the drying effect of the wind. • Women are more likely to use an emollient than men because the former care more about maintaining their appearance.
emotional (i MOH shin uhl) adj.
1. of dealing with strong feelings; 2. showing feelings, especially strong ones; 3. easily or quick to weep, be angry, etc.; 4. appealing to the emotions; moving people to tears, anger, etc.
• Karen always gets very emotional at weddings. • Victor’s return from overseas was an emotional time for his whole family. • Films that cause emotional reactions with lots of tears and “awws!” are often classified as “chick flicks.”
[-ly adv.]
emphasize (EM fuh SYZ) vt.
to give special force and importance to; to stress
• When dealing with heart disease, doctors emphasize that speed in getting treatment is urgent. • Using eyeliner emphasizes the beauty of your eyes.
[-d, emphasizing] [Syn. stress
emphatic (em FA tik) adj.
1. expressed or done with force of expression or stress; 2. using emphasis (stressing) while speaking or expressing oneself; 3. very striking; forcible; definite
• George was emphatic in his dislike for broccoli. • When scheduling the students versus teachers basketball game, Mr. Hilson was emphatic that it would be played come rain or shine. • At Waterloo, Napoleon received an emphatic defeat.
[-ally adv.] emulate* (EM yoo LAYT) vt. 1. to try to equal or surpass, often by copying; 2. to imitate (a person one admires); 3. to rival in success • Jason learned to do plumbing and wiring by attempting to emulate what he had seen his dad do. • Many successful comedians emulate the timing of the late Jack Benny. • Some companies have become very successful by emulating others. [-d, emulating] encompass* (en KAHM pis) vt. 1. to close in all around; surround; encircle; 2. to contain; include; 3. to bring about; achieve • The Galley restaurant was completely encompassed by the boat basin. • The resident pass program encompasses our efforts to deal with the parking problem around the college. • The new athletic complex, when completed, will encompass the complete revitalization of the neighborhood. [-ed, -ing]
encourage (in KOER ij) vt.
1. to give braveness, hope, or confidence; to embolden; hearten; 2. to give support to; to be favorable to; to foster; to help
• When Ian first put on ice skates, everyone tried to encourage him—not an easy task because he spent as much time on his belly as on his feet. • All voters should encourage their senators and representatives to support legislation to improve the environment.
[-d, encouraging, -ment n.]
endorse (in DAWRS) vt.
1. to sign one’s name on the back of a check; 2. to write a note, title, etc. on a document; 3. to give approval to; support; sanction
• One must endorse a check before it can be cashed. • Jack’s teacher endorsed his essay with remarks in red ink. • It is with great pleasure that I endorse that great American icon, Mickey Mouse, for president of the United States.
[-d, endorsing, -ment n.] [Syn. approve
endure (in DUR or ind YUR) vt.
1. to hold up under (pain, fatigue, etc.); to stand; bear; undergo; 2. to put up with; tolerate —vi. 1. to continue in existence; last; survive; 2. to bear pain, fatigue, etc. without flinching; hold out
• It is reputedly well documented that women can endure pain better than men. • Jane endured the cat hair on the rug for as long as she could, before she bought the boa constrictor. • The United States has endured for more than 200 years. • He’s holding a 25-pound weight in his left hand; let’s see how long he can endure.
[-d, enduring, endurance n.] [Syn. bear, continue]
energy (EN oer JEE) n.
1. potential force; inherent power; capacity for vigorous action; 2. such forces in action; 3. strength or power efficiently exerted; 4. various resources such as coal, gas, or petroleum from which heat or electrical energy can be produced; 5. (physics) the capacity to do work
• Myles’s mom hoped that he’d use up all his energy in the playground so that he’d be ready for a nap. • Running around and around in circles uses a lot of energy. • It took a good deal of energy to knock home railroad spikes with a sledgehammer. • Electrical energy is most efficiently produced by converting the energy contained in sunlight. • In physics, work is the amount of energy used multiplied by the distance an object is moved and is measured in foot-pounds.
[Syn. strength] enervate* (EN oer VAYT) vt. to sap of strength, life, vigor, etc.; to weaken in some way, physically or otherwise; to devitalize; to —adj. weakened • A long commute to work each morning is enough to enervate some people. • Many were enervated by the sight of the fall of the World Trade Center before being angered to strike back. • A home team’s losing streak can be an enervating thing. [-d, enervating, enervation n.] [Syn. unnerve, weaken]
enhance (in HAENS) vt.
1. to make greater (in cost, value, beauty, etc.); heighten; augment; 2. to improve the quality or condition of; 3. to electronically improve the clarity of an image, photo, etc. by means of a computer
• Planting shade trees often enhances the value of a home. • A trip to the salon enhanced Audrey’s appearance. • Digital photos can often readily be enhanced by the machines at your photo processor’s counter.
[-d, enhancing, -ment n.] [Syn. intensify]enigmatic* (EN ig MAT ik) adj. of or like a puzzle; perplexing; baffling • Don’s expression was enigmatic; we could not even imagine what he was thinking. • How the giant snowball appeared on the baseball field in the middle of June was enigmatic. [-ally* adv.] [Syn. obscure]
enjoy (en JOY) vt.
1. to experience pleasure; get pleasure from; relish; 2. to have the benefit or advantage of
• Margo enjoys listening to a Beethoven symphony. • Steven enjoyed his song’s receiving a large measure of radio and TV airtime.
[-ed, -ing]
enlighten (en LY tin) vt.
1. to free from ignorance, prejudice, or superstition; 2. to inform; make clear to; educate
• Years of experience with the electorate had served to enlighten the senator about the folly of favoring one group over another. • Please enlighten me as to the time you got home last night.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. inform]
enmity (EN mi tee) n.
the bitter anger or feeling of an enemy, or of mutual enemies toward one another; hostility; antagonism
• The Romans and the Scots had great enmity toward one another. • Considerable enmity characterized rival gangs of Chicago during Prohibition.
[Syn. hostility, animosity, antagonism
ensemble (on SOM bil) n.
1. all parts taken together; the total effect; 2. a complete costume, especially one having matching articles of clothing, like a suit; 3. a group of actors, dancers, etc., who perform together; 4. a musical group
• The success of the debating team does not rest on the shoulders of one member but falls on the ensemble. • With two pairs of pants, two blouses, and two jackets, you can make eight different ensembles. • This is a theatrical ensemble, with no single star. • The string quartet was a very talented ensemble.
epidemiology (EP i DEEM ee OL uh jee) n.
1. the branch of medicine that investigates the causes and control of epidemics; 2. all of the elements that combine to cause or prevent a disease in a population; ecology of a disease
• The epidemiology of the outbreak of the Ebola virus in Africa has been studied very carefully. • The epidemiology of West Nile virus and its outbreak in the eastern United States is under close scrutiny.
[epidemiological adj., epidemiologist n.]
epilogue (EP i LOG) n.
1. a closing section added to a novel, play, etc. providing extra comment, interpretation, or information; 2. a short speech or poem read by an actor to the audience at the end of a play
• An epilogue is to the end of a story what a prologue is to the beginning. • After his opera Don Giovanni ended with the lead character’s going to hell, Mozart felt obliged to add an epilogue that said the Don’s departure left the world a happier place. • Douglas MacArthur’s “Old Soldiers Never Die” speech to Congress may be looked upon as the epilogue to his career.
epitaph (EP it AF) n.
1. words written on a tomb or gravestone in memory of the person buried there; 2. a short piece in prose or verse, written as a tribute to a dead person, past event, etc.
• W. C. Fields proposed the following epitaph for himself: “Here lies W. C. Fields. I would rather be living in Philadelphia.” (It is not on his tombstone.) • When World War II ended, its epitaph was splashed across newspaper front pages in every city. epitomize* (i PIT uh MYZ) vt. 1. to summarize the main points of a book, report, incident, etc.; 2. showing all the particular qualities of something • A good book report should critique as well as epitomize the story of the book. • Actor Michael Douglas epitomizes most of the qualities of his father, Kirk.
[-d, epitomizing] [Syn. summarize]
eradicate (ir AD ik AYT) vt.
1. to tear out by the roots; uproot; 2. get rid of; wipe out; destroy
• Marge tried to eradicate the dandelions in her lawn. • It was not so easy to eradicate the nest of hornets that took up lodgings on the front porch.
[-d, eradicating, eradication n.] [Syn. exterminate
erratic (ir AT ik) adj.
1. without fixed course or purpose; irregular; random; meandering; 2. deviating from the usual course; eccentric; odd
• A moth’s erratic flight is one adaptation to its survival. • Billionaire Howard Hughes’s reclusive behavior during his final years can easily be called erratic.
[-ly adv.]
erroneous (ir OH nee uhs) adj.
based on or containing error; mistaken; wrong
• The report of your beheading was apparently erroneous. • Erroneous information is commonly on the front page of supermarket tabloids.
[-ly adv.
especially (es PESH uh lee) adj.
particularly; mainly; to a great degree; unusually
• Chinese is an especially difficult language for Occidentals to master. • This sentence is for Bill, Bob, and Marcia, and especially for Suzanne. • Especially is not an especially unusual word; you probably hear it every day—especially from TV news programs.
espouse (es POWZ) vt.
1. to take as a spouse; marry; 2. to take up, support, or advocate some cause, idea, etc.
• Diana and Charles were espoused. • Dick and Jane will espouse at 1:30 P.M. • Consumer advisors espouse shopping for a car and for financing separately. • Teddy Roosevelt often espoused speaking softly and carrying a big stick.
[-d, espousing] [Syn. advocate
essence (ES ins) n.
1. something existing; entity; 2. vital characteristic; intrinsic, fundamental nature; most important quality; 3. a substance that keeps (in concentrated form) the flavor, fragrance, or other properties of the plant, food, etc. from which it is extracted
• International law is something that exists in essence, although it is not codified. • Humor is the essence of satire and of satirical pieces. • Oddly, a certain nastiness is the essence of satirists. • Vanilla extract contains all the essence of a vanilla bean’s flavor but none of the grittiness of the seeds.
essential (is EN shil) adj.
1. of the intrinsic nature of something; basic; inherent; 2. necessary; requisite; indispensible
• A happy wagging tail is essential to a golden retriever. • It is essential to bring your driver’s license when you go to cash a check.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. vital, important, crucial]
establish (es TAB lish) vt.
1. to make stable; to make firm; 2. to permanently order, ordain, or enact (for example, a law); 3. to set up (a government, business, organization, etc.); found; institute; 4. to cause to happen or to be; bring about
• The sheriffs established law and order in the Old West. • Congress establishes the laws by which we live. • Johnny established his law office in New York City. • Rose and Dorothy established a lifelong friendship.
[-ed, -ing, -ment n.] [Syn. launch, create]
esteem (es TEEM) vt.
1. to have great regard for; to value highly; 2. to hold to be; —n. favorable opinion; high regard; respect
• Val esteemed Bert’s help in selecting colleges to apply to. • I esteem your aid in installing the storm door correctly to have been invaluable. • Do you hold your dog’s opinion of people in high esteem?
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. appreciate, admire]
ethical (ETH ik l) adj.
1. concerned with ethics or morality; of or conforming to moral standards; 2. conforming to the standards of a particular profession or group
• The Geneva Conventions deal with the ethical treatment of prisoners of war. • Many consider the testing of cosmetics on animals to be less than ethical. • The legal profession’s ethical code calls for not divulging any communication between client and attorney.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. principled]
ethicist (ETH is IST) n.
someone devoted to ethical ideas; one very well versed in moral issues and considerations
• An ethicist was consulted to help the hospital form a policy on treatment of those without medical insurance. • Ethicists are often consulted about genetic engineering projects.
[ethnician n.] [Syn. moralist]ethnicity* (eth NIS i tee) n. classification of a cultural subgroup with a common cultural heritage or nationality • Being of Ethiopian descent is an ethnicity. • Having a Lithuanian heritage is an ethnicity. • Speaking Spanish or English is a commonality of language but is not an ethnicity.
evaluate (ee VAL yoo AYT) vt.
1. to find the value or amount of; 2. to judge the worth or quality of something; appraise; 3. (math) to find the numerical value of
• The appraiser evaluated Kim’s oil painting as being worth between $1,500 and $2,000. • Jorge evaluated the parcel of land as being too small for raising cattle. • By solving the equation, Millie evaluated x to be 45.
[-d, evaluating, evaluation n.] [Syn. estimate]
evanescent (EV in ES int) adj.
tending to be transitory; having the tendency to pass or fade from sight; ephemeral
• The evanescent mist soon began to dissipate from the heat of the sun. • The evanescent smoke from the cannon’s muzzle vanished within minutes.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. transient]
eventually (ee VENT yoo i lee) adv.
finally; in the end; ultimately
• All things, good or bad, eventually come to an end. • A trip around the world will eventually bring you back to your starting point.
[eventual adj.
evidence (EV id ins) n.
1. something that makes another thing easy to see; a sign; an indication; 2. something that proves (something else); grounds to believe that something is so
• Juan’s momentary blurriness of vision was evidence of the eye problems that were to come. • Carrie’s eyewitness testimony was the evidence that made Eddie’s conviction almost certain. • Karl’s fingerprints on the machete were powerful evidence of his coconut poaching.
[Syn. proof]
evident (EV id int) adj.
easily seen; clear; obvious; plain
• It is evident that you have no knowledge of how to raise mangoes. • That the window had not been cleaned in a long time was evident from a single glance at it.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. manifest]
evitable (EV it uh bl) adj.
avoidable (Think about it; inevitable means unavoidable.)
• The automobile accident was definitely evitable. • Getting your foot stepped upon by an elephant is a very evitable event.
exacerbate (eg ZAS ir bayt) vt.
1. to increase in intensity; to sharpen; aggravate; 2. to irritate or annoy; exaggerate
• Tweaking her only exacerbates her embarrassment. • Putting weight on your twisted ankle will exacerbate your discomfort. • Showing a hungry person pictures of food serves only to exacerbate his hunger.
[-d, exacerbating]
exasperation (eg ZAS pir ay shun) n.
great irritation or annoyance; vexation
• Flora’s inability to hit the high notes in the song led to her eventual feeling of exasperation. • Exasperation usually comes from considerable effort met with little or no success.
exception (ek SEP shin) n.
1. an omission; a leaving out; 2. a situation or case in which a rule, order, etc. is not applicable; 3. an objection or disagreement
• Everyone, without exception, is responsible for washing his or her own dishes. • The No Parking signs are applicable to almost every vehicle, but a police car is an exception. • The senator took exception to the ruling of the chairman and raised a point of order.
excessive (eks ES iv) adj.
too much; too great; inappropriately large
• In subduing the perpetrator, many felt that the police had used excessive force. • Excessive anything is always too much. • Americans are generally overweight because we consume excessive quantities of food.
[excessively adv.] [Syn. inordinate, extravagant
exclude (eks KLOOD) vt.
1. to keep out; shut out; refuse to admit; bar; 2. to expel; to put out
• The doorman at the entrance to the club is there to exclude all but members and their honored guests. • The bride-to-be was excluded from the group planning her bridal shower. • Victor excluded Emanuel by giving him the boot.
[-d, excluding] [Syn. eliminate]
exclusive (eks KLOO siv) adv.
1. eliminating all others; shutting out everyone else; 2. keeping out all but those indicated or specified; 3. not shared; sole right to; 4. snobbish
• One’s spouse shoud be one’s exclusive soul mate. • The golf course is for the exclusive use of its members. • Sandy Hook’s beach is for the exclusive use of people named Sandy. • The country club’s exclusive membership committee refuses to accept an application from anyone whose net worth is less than $10,000,000.
[-ly adv., -ness n.]
exculpate (EKS kul payt) vt.
1. to prove to be without blame or guilt; 2. to declare to be guiltless
• Verifying Laura’s alibi served to exculpate her from the potential charges. • The DNA results had absolutely nothing to do with exculpating the dog in the case of the disappearing sandwich.
[-d, exculpating, exculpatory adj.] [Syn. absolve]
excursion (eks KUR zhin) n.
1. a short trip with intent to return relatively soon to the point of origin; a pleasure jaunt; 2. a round trip on a train, plane, etc., usually with certain provisions, sold at bargain rates; 3. a group taking such a trip; 4. a digression from the main point, journey, etc.
• The Circle Line specializes in waterborne excursions around the island of Manhattan. • A Saturday night stay-over and traveling on Tuesday or Thursday are usual conditions of special rates for airline excursions. • An excursion to the Pyramids was part of the Egyptian group package. • A two-day excursion to Paris was a part of our London trip.
exemplary (eg ZEM plir ee) adj.
1. (from example) a model; worthy of imitation; 2. serving as a warning; 3. acting as a sample, illustration, etc.
• Roxane’s behavior at the restaurant was exemplary. • The judge’s severe punishment was an exemplary one and served as a notice to potential wrongdoers. • Charlie brought an exemplary brownie so that the custom baker would know what he wanted made.
[exemplarily adv., exemplariness n.
exemplify (eg ZEM pli FY) vt.
1. to serve as an example; 2. to show by example
• Gloria’s behavior at the solemn memorial service exemplifies the proper way to behave at such an event. • Peter’s essay should exemplify what Mrs. Jones is looking for in a book report.
[exemplified, -ing]
exhibit (eg ZIB it) vt.
1. to show or display; 2. to open to public view; 3. to give evidence of
• Rhea exhibited her school artwork for her parents to admire. • The Guggenheim collection is exhibited daily in a museum designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. • Lawrence is exhibiting a good deal of irritation with the automobile cleaning service.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. prove, reveal]
existence (eg ZIST ins) n.
1. state of being; act of living; 2. taking place; occurrence; 3. manner of living
• According to DesCartes, one’s existence is proven by the fact that one thinks—at least I think it is. • The existence of a circus at Madison Square Garden is made evident by the odors that meet the noses of passersby. • Homeless persons live a rather wretched existence
exorbitant (eg ZAWR bit int) adj.
above and beyond what is reasonable; immodest; excessive; extravagant
• Would you say that William Randolph Hearst lived a rather exorbitant lifestyle at San Simeon? • Some (myself included) consider $8 movie theater tickets to be exorbitant.
expect (eks PEKT) vt.
1. to look for or look forward to as likely to happen or appear; 2. to look for as if it were due; 3. to suppose
• Gizmo, the dog, sits by the front door each evening at 6:00 expecting his master at any moment. • After retrieving the customer’s car, the valet held out his hand as if a gratuity was expected. • Diane expects to have a late supper after the theater.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. anticipate, presume]
expedite (EKS pid YT) vt.
1. to speed up, hasten, or facilitate something’s happening; 2. to do quickly
• Preheating the oven will expedite dinner after mom brings the frozen pizza home. • Paying for overnight delivery will expedite your receiving the new software package.
[-d, expediting]
experience (eks PIR ee ens) n.
1. having had personal involvement in events as they occurred; 2. anything lived through or observed; 3. all that has occurred in one’s life to that point in time being considered; 4. the effect of everything that has happened to a person or that the person has observed —vt. to personally encounter; to undergo
• After her third child, Melissa had ambivalent feelings surrounding the experience of childbirth. • About 20 million people experienced the Northeast electrical blackout of 1977. • Karen’s total experience through the first 53 years of her life made her an optimistic person. • David’s urban life experiences gave him a cynical outlook. • Try to experience as many new things as possible.
[-d, experiencing]
experiment (eks PER im int) n.
1. a test to find something not yet known or to confirm or demonstrate something; 2. the performing of such tests —vi. to do experiments
• It took many experiments to find a vaccine for polio. • Daphne’s experiments with different versions of an uppercase D took place over several months before she settled on a signature that she was pleased with. • Jake’s mom experimented with many combinations of peanut butter and jelly before finding one he liked.
[-al adj., -ally adv.] [Syn. trial
expertise (EKS poer TEEZ) n.
the knowledge and capability of one who is highly skilled and trained in some particular field
• Jason demonstrated considerable expertise in building the deck in back of his house. • Uncle Bob’s botched repair job on the porch door attested to his complete lack of expertise.
explicit (eks PLIS it) adj.
1. distinctly and clearly stated; 2. plain and easily understandable or observable
• Helene left explicit instructions on how the cat and houseplants were to be cared for during her absence. • The store’s return policy is explicit about no refunds and is clearly posted behind the counter in plain view.
[-ly* adv.] [Syn. distinct; Ant. vague, ambiguous] exploitation* (EKS ploy TAY shin) n. 1. a using of something or someone in an unethical manner for one’s own benefit or profit; 2. a use of the labor of others for profit without appropriate compensation • Sweatshops in the garment industry are largely exploitation of undocumented workers. • The United Farmworkers union was built to stop the exploitation of Mexican and other migratory workers by large corporate farmers.
express (eks PRES) vt.
1. to squeeze out; 2. to put into words; state; 3. to reveal; to show; 4. to represent in artistic or musical form —adj. 1. explicit as opposed to implied; 2. made for a special purpose; 3. high speed
• Express a cut lemon to get juice from it. • Norma has difficulty expressing herself in writing. • Don chose tonight to express his love of key lime pie. • Beethoven expresses great joy in his ninth symphony. • Steven gave Leonard express permission to use his tools. • Express regulations govern the registration of handguns. • The express train skips many of the local stops.
[-ed, -ing, -ly adv.] [Syn. convey, utter
expression (eks PRE shuhn) n.
1. a pressing out, like making juice; 2. putting something into words; 3. a representation in art, in music, etc.; 4. a manner of speaking; intonation; 5. an idiomatic phrase; 6. a facial contortion or showing of emotion
• Expression of grape juice from grapes is now accomplished by giant machines rather than peasant feet. • Evan wrote an expression of his thanks for the gift. • Picasso’s Guernica was an expression of the horrors brought on by the Spanish Civil War. • An expression of discomfort was evident from the hesitating mannerisms characterizing Jill’s voice. • “Another day, another dollar” is just an expression. • Evelyn’s expression went from none to a big smile. extent* (eks TENT) adj. 1. length; width; distance covered; 2. the scope or limits of anything; 3. a vast area • The extent of the cat’s run was about the length of a football field. • The extent of the pathologist’s range of interest extends beyond microbes into the realm of human behavior. • The Sahara Desert is of considerable extent. extenuate* (eks TEN yoo AYT) vt. to lessen or seem to lessen in seriousness by excuses • Elliot believed that his having felt threatened by the rabbit should extenuate his guilt at having slammed the door on it. • Caroline believed that Jack would be less upset about her lateness after he had heard the extenuating circumstances.
[-d, extenuating* vt., adj., extenuation n.]extinct* (eks TEENKT) adj. 1. dead; no longer active; 2. no longer in existence • Many volcanoes, although they have not erupted in generations, are considered dormant rather than extinct. • The Tyrannosaurus rex is definitely extinct. • The saber-toothed tiger is an extinct feline ancestor. [Syn. vanished] extol* (eks TOHL) vt. to sing the praises of; laud • Laurie could not help but extol the flavor of her mother’s fudge brownies. • Jonathan’s jumping into the lake and rescuing the toddler was extolled on all the evening news shows. [-led, -ling] [Syn. praise]
extravagant (eks TRAV i gint) adj.
1. excessive; beyond reasonable boundaries; 2. too fancy; 3. too expensive
• Ali’s 15-karat diamond earrings could certainly be called extravagant. • Most of those present at Thursday’s PTA meeting felt it was extravagant of Principal Smith to have worn a tuxedo. • It was very extravagant of the Department of Defense to have spent $300 on a hammer.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. profligate, profuse]
extricate (EKS trik AYT) vt.
to set free; to release; to disentangle
• The boat’s skipper fought hard to extricate it from the path of the oncoming storm. • The activist extricated the beaver from the trap. • The dolphin wriggled in its struggle to extricate itself from the commercial fishing net.
[-d, extricating, extrication n., extricable adj.
fabrication (FAB ri KAY shuhn) n.
1. something being constructed or manufactured; 2. a made-up thing, especially a falsehood; false excuse; lie
• The fabrication was completed on-site and would serve as office space for the workers. • The new cabinets were the fabrication of a fine craftsman. • Archie’s story about having been asked out by Veronica was a fabrication.
factor (FAK tir) n.
1. any of the conditions, circumstances, etc. that bring on a certain result; 2. (math) any of two or more quantities that are multiplied together to form a product —vt. (math) to resolve an expression into its component factors
• Weather is one factor that might cause the postponement of tomorrow’s picnic. • Multiplying the factors 2 and 6 always produces 12. • When dealing with a trinomial of the form ax2 + bx + c, it always pays to try to factor out an a.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. element, agent] fallacious* (fuh LAY shus) adj. 1. containing an error; mistaken; 2. misleading or deceptive • Your logic in this matter is fallacious. • It is fallacious to think that putting insect-repelling candles by the edge of a marsh will prevent mosquito bites. [-ly adv.]
fallible (FAL i bl) adj.
1. capable of making a mistake; 2. apt to be erroneous or less than accurate
• One person is too fallible to be trusted to make all the important decisions. • A pencil-and-paper calculation of a difficult problem is likely to be more fallible than one made using a calculator or computer.
[fallibly adv., fallibility n.] falsification* (FAWL si fi KAY shun) n. 1. a deliberately misleading account; misrepresentation; 2. a fraudulently altered record; something proven untrue • A falsification of the account of the Battle of the Little Bighorn had Custer’s forces winning the day. • Some people are mistakenly spending time in prison for crimes they did not commit, because of falsifications on the part of certain witnesses. [falsity n., falsify vi.
fathom (FA thim) vt.
1. to measure the depth (of water); 2. to understand completely; comprehend —n. a unit of length equal to 6 feet, primarily used to measure water depth
• Keep fathoming the water beneath our keel. • You must make sure that you completely fathom the directions before you proceed. • The fathom was originally the measure from middle fingertip to middle fingertip of a man with his arms spread wide.
[-ed, -ing] feasible* (FEE zi bl) adj. 1. doable; practicable; 2. reasonable; suitable • It is not always feasible to change one’s automobile oil at the specified intervals. • We’ll need a study to decide whether putting a skating rink into West Park is feasible. [feasibly adv., feasability n.] [Syn. possible]
felicitous (fel IS it is) adj.
1. appropriate; used in a way suitable to the occasion; 2. having the knack to pleasingly express
• A tuxedo is a felicitous outfit to wear to a formal wedding. • Melissa is careful to be felicitous in all her public doings. • Ariel writes in a felicitous manner.
[-ly adv.]
fiction (FIK shin) n.
1. something made up or feigned; 2. something imagined; 3. a literary story using imaginary characters and/or events
• Rachel’s proclaiming that she was having a heart attack was pure fiction, meant to attract attention. • The monster that lives in your closet is no fiction! • The Legend of Sleepy Hollow was a work of fiction that came from the pen of Washington Irving.
figurative (FIG yoer uh TIV) adj.
1. representing by likeness, picture, or figure; 2. having to do with drawing, painting, etc.; 3. not in the usual or exact sense; analagous to; metaphoric
• Some artists have figurative talents, while others do better with landscapes. • When you say that he’s caused you a million heartaches, we presume that you mean that in a figurative sense.
[figuratively adv.]
financial (fy NAN shuhl) adj.
1. dealing with money resources, income, etc.; 2. concerning managing money, credit, etc.
• A corporation’s chief financial officer is responsible for overseeing all income and expenditures. • One unavoidable financial report that we all must deal with each year is our income tax return.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. pecuniary, fiscal
firebrand (FYR brand) n.
1. a piece of burning wood; 2. a person who stirs up a revolution, strife, or trouble
• Keep the firebrands well isolated in the fireplace so that they don’t ignite flammable curtains or furniture. • Samuel Adams was a real firebrand, always ready to incite the crowd.
flammable (FLA muh bl) adj.
easily burnable; quick to catch fire; readily ignited
• Laws now restrict the flammability of children’s pajamas. • What is now known as flammable used to be “inflammable,” or how readily something would go up in flame.
[flammability n.]
flippancy (FLIP uhn see) n.
1. the quality or state of being frivolous and disrespectful; sauciness; impertinence; 2. such a remark
• Some of the most effective stand-up comedians have built a carreer on flippancy. • One of the late Hennie Youngman’s most famous flippancies was the line “Now, take my wife—please!”
[flippancies pl.]
florid (FLAW rid) adj.
1. pink; rosy or ruddy in complexion; 2. highly showy; decorated
• After three hours in the wind, Anna’s cheeks were florid. • Cadenzas are florid passages in solo instrument parts that allow the soloist to show his or her virtuosity. • Many homes become florid with holiday lights in December.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. ornate]
flout (FLOWT) vt.
1. to show contempt or scorn for; mock; 2. to disregard openly; to defy; ignore
• Teenage boys are infamous for flouting their father figures’ authority. • Those Texans and Texacanos holed up in the Alamo flouted General Santa Ana’s demands for surrender.
[-ed, -ing]
fluent (FLOO int) adj.
1. flowing or smoothly moving along; 2. able to read or write smoothly and clearly in a foreign language or technical terminology
• The horse’s motion was fluent as he unhesitatingly galloped down the home stretch. • Quentin is fluent in French, but he should be because his parents were born there and speak it at home. • To get along in today’s world, you need to be fluent in technical terms, like WYSIWYG.
[-ly adv.
focus (FOH kus) n.
1. the point at which waves (light, heat, sound) come together, or from which they seem to be generated; 2. an adjustmant of a lens to create a sharp image; 3. any center of attention, activity, etc. —vt. 1. to bring into clarity; 2. to adjust the focal length of a lens, the eye, etc. to make clear; 3. to concentrate on one thing
• The focus of a lens or mirror is also better known as the focal point. • An image seen through a lens can be brought into focus by moving the lens, the object, or the person viewing it. • The person who is the focus of all the other people’s attention at a party might be the life or death of the party. • When moving from a dark room to a well-lit room, it takes the eyes a moment or so to focus and adjust to the difference. • Most adjustable cameras use a ring to focus the lens and make your viewfinder image sharp and clear. • Sometimes the only way to get a job done is to focus on one task at a time.
[-ed, -ing
foolhardy (FOOL hahr dee) adj.
rash; reckless; bold or daring in a foolish way
• Sid’s rushing into the burning building to rescue the cat was both heroic and foolhardy. • Sometimes foolhardy acts are rewarded by thankful people; most times they’re rewarded by disaster.
foreboding (fawr BOH ding) n.
a prescience or portent, especially of something bad to come
• When Nan and Suzie stepped into the haunted house, they each had a feeling of foreboding. • Audrey’s foreboding caused her to exit the tunnel, just moments before it collapsed.
forgery (FAWR joer ee) n.
the act of imitating artworks, money, signatures, etc. with the intent to deceive
• Elmyr de Hory sold hundreds of pieces of art forgery to the galleries and museums of the world. • His story was originally told in the book Fake, by Clifford Irving, who later wrote the forgery of Howard Hughes’s autobiography. • The Secret Service’s main task is to stop forgery of U.S. currency.
[forgeries pl.]
forlorn (fawr LAWRN) adj.
1. deserted or abandoned; 2. unhappy and lonely
• Being marooned on a desert island would tend to make one feel forlorn. • Left standing at the altar, Harold heaved a forlorn sigh.
[-ly adv., -ness n.]
forsake (fawr SAYK) vt.
1. to give up; abandon (a habit, ideal, etc.); 2. to leave; renounce
• Having decided to forsake his 1971 Chevy, Gerald left it by the side of the road in Timbuktu. • It behooves anyone who has started smoking cigarettes to forsake that practice forthwith. • Janet vowed to forsake her life of crime and to become a doer of good deeds.
[forsook, -n, forsaking]
fortitude (FAWR ti tood) n.
the strength to withstand pain and misfortune calmly and patiently
• Although the fire’s consumption of their home was a great loss to Malcom and his family, they withstood it with fortitude. • It is not easy to display fortitude in the face of tragedy, but by definition, that’s the only way one can do it.
[Syn. grit, courage
fortunate (FAWR tyoo nit) adj.
1. lucky; having good luck; having good fortune; 2. favorable; auspicious
• Roger was fortunate to have taken the plane just before the flight that crashed. • Sarah was very fortunate when she picked the winning lottery numbers.
[fortunately adv.]
foster (FAW stir) vt.
1. to carefully raise; rear; 2. to nourish; help grow or develop; promote —adj. being treated as a certain member of the family, although neither related nor adopted
• Mickey fostered the colt as if it were his own child. • Dairy farmers foster a national campaign to promote milk drinking. • Dorothy and Al are foster parents to three foster children.
[-ed, -ing]
fracture (FRAK chir) vt.
1. to break or split; to crack; 2. to disrupt; to break up —n. 1. a break or cleft; 2. a broken-off part; fragment; 3. a broken bone
• The 2003 invasion of Iraq helped to fracture the Franco-American alliance. • Alice’s shriek fractured the near-complete silence. • Matt fractured his ulna playing ice hockey. • The doctor set Mike’s fractured finger with a splint. • Flint knives were made by hitting two pieces of flint together in hopes of fracturing a chip off one to form the blade.
[-d, fracturing] [Syn. break]
freedom (FREE dim) n.
1. the state or quality of being free from the control of other persons, or certain laws or regulations; 2. a right or privilege
• The nations of the Americas value their freedom from their former European colonizers. • Police cars on duty enjoy freedom from the parking regulations in the city. • Freedom of speech and freedom of religion are just two of the rights Americans are supposed to enjoy.
frequency (FREE kwin see) n.
1. the number of times something is repeated within a certain specified time frame; number of oscillations per time period; 2. a repeated or repeating occurrence
• When something vibrates between about 30 and 16,000 times per second, its frequency is within the range of normal human hearing. • Supersonic frequencies are above the range of human hearing, while subsonic frequencies are below that range. • The frequency of car horn honkings in Amanda’s neighborhood is about five per hour
frugal (FROO gil) adj.
1. economical; thrifty; not wasteful; 2. inexpensive; not costly
• Frugal shoppers consider house brands when buying food. • Cars with good gas mileage are built with the frugal in mind. • Frugal watches tell time as well as those in gold cases.
[-ly adv., -ity n.] [Syn. thrifty]
frustrate (FRUH strayt) vt.
1. to cause to not have an effect; nullify; 2. to block; to prevent from attaining an objective
• Burglar alarms are designed to frustrate those who would hope to break and enter without detection. • The large number of false alarms from automotive burglar alarms could frustrate the reason they were installed. • Destroyers and antisubmarine bombers frustrated the U-boat captains of Germany’s Kriegsmarine.
[-d, frustrating, frustration n.] [Syn. thwart, baffle, foil]
function (FUHNK shin) vi.
1. to act in the usual or expected way; 2. to serve or be used (as) —n. 1. the usual action or use of something; 2. a special use or action of something; 3. one’s job; 4. something that depends on and changes with something else
• Fred’s bicycle functions just the way a bicycle should. • The doorman functions as both greeter and gatekeeper. • It is the function of a bottle opener to (duh!) open bottles. • When jacking up a car for a tire change, a brick or block of wood should function as a cross block for its diagonally opposite tire. • Joanne’s function at the office is public relations. • In graphing an algebraic function, or equation, the value of the dependent variable, y, changes with the value of the independent variable, x.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. capacity, use]
fundamental (FUHN di MENT il) adj.
1. basic; at the root of; essential; 2. radical; 3. chief; most important —n. 1. a principle, theory, etc.; 2. an essential
• The fundamental rights of all humans are the rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. • The new law makes fundamental changes in the tax rates. • The fundamental principle of America is that all men are created equal. • The fundamentals of safe operation of the tool are in the owners’ manual. • Getting a license is a fundamental of driving an automobile.
[-ly adv.
gargantuan (gahr GAN tyoo uhn) adj.
huge; gigantic (from Rabelais’s 1552 satire, Gargantua and Pantagruel)
• There was a gargantuan traffic jam at the in-bound George Washington Bridge.
garish (GAI rish) adj.
1. very showy; very bright and gaudy; 2. showily dressed, written, or decorated
• The outfit she chose, with the hot pink top and the chartreuse bottom, can only be described as garish. • The decorations were a garish blend of Peter Max, Andy Warhol, and Dollywood, with a liberal sprinkling of Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band.
[-ly adv.]
genealogy (JEE nee AH li jee) n.
1. a chart showing the ancestry of a person or family; 2. the study of family descent
• Gloria’s genealogy was spread out on the dining room table. • Rick could trace his genealogy back to late-nineteenth-century Russia, but no farther back than that.
[geneological adj., genealogically adv.]
generalize (JEN er il YZ) vt.
to put into nonspecific terms; to infer from —vi. 1. to talk in generalities; 2. to create principles from known events; 3. to spread
• It is easy to generalize about the benefits of voting for one over the other, but a lot harder to get down to specifics. • Most politicians find it easier to generalize than to take a fast stand for which they might later be called to task. • Newton generalized from the things he observed every day to ultimately develop his laws of motion. • The local custom of buttering one’s plate and then rubbing bread on it is unlikely to generalize to the nation at large.
[-d, generalizing, generalization n.]
generation (JEN er AY shun) n.
1. the act of producing something; 2. the specific act of producing offspring; procreation; 3. a single stage in the life cycle of a species; time between birth and procreation (in humans about 25 years); 4. a group of people born around the same time period
• The generation of electricity is a high priority for western states, which are growing in population density. • Henry VIII’s desire for the generation of a male heir was the main reason the Church of England separated from Rome. • Fruit flies are much better subjects for studying genetics than humans because there can be a new generation every few days. • If you were born after 1970, you are part of the computer generation
genetics (jen ET iks) adj.
1. the branch of science that deals with heredity; 2. the traits of an individual, group, or type
• As branches of biology go, genetics is a rather young science but one that has yielded great returns. • DNA research and identification is only one of the benefits brought about by genetics. • Look at parent and child next to one another, and often the common genetics are obvious.
glacial (GLAY shil) adj.
1. of or like ice; of or like glaciers; 2. produced by a glacier or during a glacial age; 3. freezing; very cold; 4. unfriendly; 5. very, very slow, like the progress of a glacier
• The surface of Antarctica is quite glacial in texture, except where it is snow covered. • Many mountain streams of today are of glacial production. • Brrr! The weather outside is glacial in feel. • Annette froze Hiram with a glacial glare. • William had such a fear of calculus that his progress in the subject could only be described as glacial.
[-ly adv.]
glissade (gli SAHD) n.
1. a mountain climber’s deliberate slide down a snowcovered hill; 2. a gliding ballet step
• While descending the slopes of Everest, Hillary welcomed every glissade he had the chance to take. • Ballerinas frequently do glissades when not on point (on their toes)
glutton (GLUH tin) n.
1. a person who can eat a copious amount (like a pig); 2. someone capable of a great amount of something
• The glutton consumed such mass quantities of food that his dining companion feared that he might explode. • Although Blossom had rejected his advances seven times before, being a glutton for punishment, Karl had to try just one more time.
[Syn. epicure]
gracious (GRAY shis) adj.
1. showing kindness, courtesy, charm, etc.; 2. compassionate; merciful; 3. showing kindness toward those in inferior positions; 4. showing taste and luxuriousness appropriate to the well-to-do and well educated
• Catherine was very gracious in her acceptance of the gifts. • Francine listened to the prisoners’ complaints about the quality of the food in a very gracious manner. • The prince was gracious as he was introduced to the members of the regiment. • Though sumptuous, the appointments of the manor were gracious so as to afford comfort to all who might visit.
[-ly adv.]
grandiose (GRAN dee ohs) adj.
1. imposing; impressive; magnificent; having grandeur; 2. seeming important, pompous, and showy, or trying to so seem
• The Breakers (built as a summer home by the Vanderbilts in Newport, Rhode Island) can only be described as grandiose. • Napoleon had grandiose plans for a French empire. • The court of Louis XVI was so grandiose as to show the commoners how unimportant they were.
gratuity (gra TOO i tee) n.
a sum of money, often based on a percentage of the total bill, paid to a server or other service person; tip; present
• An appropriate gratuity for the waitperson at a restaurant is 15–20%, depending on the quality of service. • A gratuity should rarely be left at a European restaurant because the cost of service is already reflected on the bill. • Twenty percent is the appropriate gratuity for taxicab drivers.
[gratuities pl.] [Syn. tip]
greed (GREED) n.
a desire for more than one needs or deserves; cupidity
• Greed is not always about money, although it often is. • Monarchs and dictators through history have shown greed for land and/or power. • Greed for more land also fueled the nineteenth-century American doctrine of Manifest Destiny.
[-iness n.] [Syn. avarice]
grudging (GRUD jing) adj.
reluctant; with envy and resentment
• The company’s outgoing CEO gave a grudging acknowledgment to his successor at the board meeting. • Henry’s ex-wife said a grudging hello to his new wife when they came to take the children for the weekend.
[-ly adv.
hackneyed (HAK need) adj.
made commonplace or trite through overuse
• “Been there, done that” is one example of a hackneyed expression. • “We’re going to give it 110%” is both hackneyed and impossible.
[Syn. trite]
harangue (hoer ANG) n.
a long, loud, scolding speech; a blustering tirade —vt. to speak or address one in such a manner
• The sergeant gave the patrol a 20-minute harangue when they failed to be in the first two to finish their exercise. • The coach harangued the kicker for 15 minutes for having missed the field goal.
[-d, haranguing] [Syn. tirade] harass (HAR ris, hoer AS) vt. 1. to bother or torment as with worries, bills, repeated questions, etc.; 2. to trouble by repeatedly attacking • Bill collectors harass their debtors with phone calls at all hours of the day and night. • Viola’s ex-boyfriend, Ted, kept harassing her about why they couldn’t give it a second try. • The attack helicopters kept harassing the retreating enemy with repeated sorties against their rear guard. [-ed, -ing]
harvest (HAHR vist) n.
1. the time of year when ripe crops are reaped; 2. a season’s yield of crops or of a particular crop —vt., vi. 1. to gather in the ripe crop(s); 2. to trap, shoot, or catch game, usually for commercial purposes; 3. to get something as the result of some action; 4. to collect organs for transplant
• Autumn is the time for the cranberry harvest. • There was a plentiful harvest of all crops last year. • We need some migrant labor to help harvest the grapes. • Salmon farms harvest only salmon of a certain age after breeding is finished. • How much goodwill you can harvest depends on how much your speech is believed. • Surgeons harvest hearts, lungs, livers, kidneys, and corneas from donors for transplant.
[-ed, -ing, -er n.]
heckle (HEK il) vt.
to annoy or harrass a speaker by taunting or interrupting with annoying questions
• It’s not unusual for comedians in a nightclub to be heckled by one or more inebriated audience members. • When the prime minister of England speaks to Parliament, he can expect members of the opposition to heckle him.
[-d, heckling, -r* n.] [Syn. bait]hedonism (HEED ’n IZ m) n. 1. (philosophy) the belief that the happiness of the individual or the society is of paramount importance; 2. (psychology) the theory that a person always acts to seek pleasure and avoid pain; 3. a self-indulgence in seeking one’s own pleasure as a way of life • The philosophy of hedonism is most closely associated with the ancient Greek philosopher, Epicurus (342–270 B.C.E.), who taught that all our actions should maximize pleasure and minimize pain. • Psychological hedonism views humans as built or programmed to exclusively desire pleasure. • Spending one’s entire life on a luxury cruise ship in the Caribbean is probably the ultimate goal of modern hedonism. [hedonistic adj., hedonistically adv., hedonist n.
heed (HEED) vt.
pay close attention to; to take careful notice of; obey
• A mother expects her child to heed her—at least until he turns 18. • Ice skaters may be ejected if they do not heed the skating rink’s regulations. • Before going into the theater, make sure to heed the rules regarding bringing in outside food.
[-ed, -ing, -ful adj., -fully adv.
heighten (HY tin) vt.
1. to take to a higher position; raise; rise; 2. to make better, greater, stronger, etc.; increase; intensify
• Alexis hoped that by taking evening classes, she would heighten her value to the firm. • Regular periods of exercise can only heighten one’s fitness. • Having been picked on as a child served to heighten Paul’s awareness of the sensitivities of others.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. intensify]
heinous (HAY nuhs) adj.
terribly evil; wicked; abominable; totally awful
• The treatment of Iraqi Kurds by Saddam Hussein’s government can only be described as heinous. • It is heinous of anyone to attempt to deny that the Holocaust of World War II actually took place.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. outrageous]
heritage (HER i tij) n.
1. any property that has been or will be inherited; 2. the rights, status, or duties attached to having been born of a certain status or at a specific time or place; birthright
• Aunt Dora’s lamp with the reverse-painted shade is Karen and Bob’s heritage (along with a load of crackle glass). • Freedoms of speech, press, and religion are the heritage of every American citizen. • It is also every American citizen’s heritage to defend those freedoms.
[Syn. inheritance, birthright]
hierarchy (HY ir AHR kee) n.
1. a group of officials, persons, or things arranged by rank, class, grade, etc.; a group of church officials so arranged; 2. the highest officials in such a group
• The heirarchy of commissioned officers in the army is easy to see because the ranks are arranged from the low rank of lieutenant to the top rank of general. • The hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church begins with the pastor, travels up through the bishops, archbishops, and cardinals, and ends with the pope. • From municipality to county to state to federal is the hierarchy of U.S. government.
[hierarchical adj., hierarchically adv.]
hinder (HIN doer) vt.
1. to restrain; hold back; prevent; 2. to impede; make difficult for —vi. to get in the way of
• Police barriers are used at parades to hinder the public’s physical access to the marchers. • Jaamal’s sore ankle hindered his ability to play basketball. • A lightning storm would definitely hinder any action taking place at the golf tournament.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. obstruct, impede
hindrance (HIN drins) n.
1. the act of preventing; 2. obstacle; impediment; obstruction
• Hindrance of the bill’s coming to a vote was the intended purpose of the senator’s filibuster. • A Jersey Barrier is a deliberate hindrance to keep traffic moving in opposite directions from crashing into one another. • Being a woman was a considerable hindrance to Jennifer’s attempt to join the men’s baseball team.
[Syn. obstacle]
hostility (hahs TIL i tee) n.
1. a feeling of antagonism, ill will, unfriendliness, etc.; enmity; 2. hostile acts; an expression of enmity or ill will
• A general feeling of hostility toward Japan permeated America after the attack on Pearl Harbor. • Hostility between members of rival gangs has made it difficult to live in some parts of certain U.S. cities. • Hostility of the people toward the regime was the ultimate cause of the storming of the Bastille that began the French Revolution.
[Syn. enmity]
humanity (yoo MAN i tee) n.
1. human nature; the act or quality of being of the species Homo sapien; 2. (pl.) human qualities, especially the desirable ones; 3. kindness, caring, mercy, sympathy, etc.; 4. mankind; people; 5. (pl.) the branches of learning dealing with social sciences
• All humanity is confined to the surface of the earth. • Studying the humanities usually results in a Bachelor of Arts degree. • In times of stress or hardship, it falls on all of us to display our humanity to one another. • A natural disaster on any part of this planet impacts all humanity.
[humanities pl.]
humorous (YOO mer uhs) adj.
funny; amusing; comical; showing humor
• If one did not take a humorous view of life’s happenings, he or she would be doomed to constant tears. • Being humorous for a living is a difficult task that very few people manage to accomplish. • Sebastian, who is two years old, thinks that rolling the sleeping dog off the sofa is humorous.
[Syn. witty, droll, funny]
hypocrite (HIP uh krit) n.
someone who pretends to be pious, virtuous, etc. without really being so; one who feigns being what he or she is not; a fake; pretender; sham
• Although Lloyd makes a big show of his piety at church on Sundays, he is really a hypocrite because he drinks, cusses, and chases loose women the rest of the week. • Used-car salespersons have a well-deserved reputation for being hypocrites, guaranteeing you the world until you’ve signed the contract, then not taking your phone calls.
[hypocritical adj., hypocritically adv.]hypothesis* (hy PAH thi sis) n. an unproved theory, supposition, presumption, etc. often used to provide a jumping-off point for exploring further • An apple’s falling from a tree, the story goes, inspired Newton’s hypothesis that led to his laws of gravitation. • The hypothesis that heat travels from warmer bodies to cooler bodies gave rise to the science of thermodynamics. • The hypothesis that base metals could be turned into precious metals proved untrue, and so chemistry came to replace alchemy. [hypotheses* pl.
idiosyncrasy (ID ee yoh SEENK ruh see) n.
1. a personal, peculiar mannerism or affectation; 2. an individual reaction to a food, drug, etc. that is different from other peoples’ normal reaction to the same
• Robert’s idiosyncrasy is touching food to his chin before putting it into his mouth. • An idiosyncrasy of Aren’s was triggered by her eating strawberries, following which blue smoke would issue forth from both her ears.
[idiosyncrasies pl., idiosyncratic adj., idiosyncratically adv.]
ignore (ig NAWR) vt.
1. to intentionally disregard; 2. to pay no attention to; 3. to refuse to consider
• A sure way to cause an accident is to ignore a stop sign. • Frieda often ignores the cat’s meowing by the front door. • The judge ignored Jeff’s excuse that he hadn’t known his act was against the law.
[-d, ignoring, ignorance n.] [Syn. neglect]
illusory (il YOO sir ee) adj.
unreal or deceptive; having the characteristics of an illusion
• Sue’s guitar-playing talent was illusory, her best work having been achieved on air guitar. • Custer’s superiority over the Sioux at the Little Bighorn proved to be purely illusory.
illustrate (IL uhs TRAYT) vt.
1. to explain; to make clear; 2. to exemplify; 3. to provide pictures, drawings, diagrams, etc. —vi. to offer an example for the purpose of making something clear
• A schematic diagram can easily illustrate how an electrical circuit works. • The story of Jackie Robinson’s career illustrates the ideal role model that some major leaguers have been. • Children’s books are often illustrated because a child can appreciate pictures far more easily than written words. • Accentuating the positive is illustrated by Jonah in the whale or Noah in the ark, says the song.
[-d, illustrating, illustration n.]
imagine (im A jin) vt.
1. to conceive in the mind; form a mental picture; 2. to guess; to think; to suppose —vi. to use the imagination
• From the sound of her voice on the phone, Jonathan could imagine what Daphne looked like. • Jerry could not even imagine how he’d have reacted had he been in George’s shoes. • Kareem imagined he was on a magic carpet ride.
[-d, imagining, imagination n.
imitate (IM i TAYT) vt.
1. to copy; to mimic; 2. to emulate; attempt to follow the example of; 3. to duplicate; reproduce; 4. to resemble
• Ian’s drawings imitated those of his older brother and dealt with senseless violence and gore—artfully, of course. • Frankie’s attempt to imitate Uncle Jimmy made everyone laugh, as he smacked himself in the forehead with his palm. • Marcy’s pictures imitate Valerie’s so closely that she might as well have used a duplicating machine. • Some of Harry’s paintings imitate those of Mondrian.
[-d, imitating, imitation, imitator n.] [Syn. ape, mimic, emulate]
immerse (i MOERS) vt.
1. to plunge, drop, or dip into a liquid, or as if into a liquid; 2. to submerge in water; 3. to thoroughly absorb oneself in some activity; engross
• Some Christian denominations baptize their members by totally immersing them; others baptize by sprinkling water on their members’ heads. • Immerse your nonstick cookware in soapy water and season it with oil before using it for the first time. • I was so immersed in the Times crossword puzzle that I didn’t notice the phone until the third or fourth ring.
[-d*, immersing, immersion n.]
immoderate (i MAH doer it) adj.
excessive; without restraint
• Eighty miles per hour is an immoderate speed to drive at, as well as an illegal one in most states. • An immoderate amount of sunlight can cause skin cancer.
[-ly adv., immoderation n.] [Syn. excessive]
impact (IM pakt) vt.
1. to force together; to tightly pack; 2. to affect —n. 1. a collision; violent contact; 2. the power of an event to change feelings, bring about changes, etc.; shock
• Impact the head of a nail enough times with the head of a hammer and you’ll drive it home, unless you’ve bent it. • The news of her sister’s accident impacted Allison deeply. • The bumpers of the two cars were involved in the impact. • News of the president’s assassination had a great impact on nearly everybody.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. shock]
impart (im PAHRT) vt.
1. to make known; tell; reveal; 2. to give a share in or of something
• When lecturing his son the on birds and bees, Mr. Brown imparted far more information than the boy wanted to know. • If a teacher is a good one, he or she will impart an intellectual curiosity to his or her students.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. reveal
impassioned (im PASH ind) adj.
filled with, feeling, or showing very strong feeling; passionate; ardent; fiery
• The father made an impassioned plea to the kidnappers to release his daughter unharmed. • The governor was impassioned in his appeal for people to donate blood to help the accident victims.
[-ly adv.]
imperceptible (IM poer SEP ti bl) adj.
barely noticeable; not clearly distinct to the mind or the senses; very subtle
• The difference in flavors between the two brands of cola is almost imperceptible. • Though imperceptible to some, there are differences in the sound quality of a bassoon’s high register and an oboe’s low one.
[imperceptibly* adv.
impermanent (im POER mi nint) adj.
not lasting; temporary; fleeting
• A snowman is a rather impermanent type of statuary—especially in Maryland. • Weather differs from climate in that the former is an impermanent condition.
[-ly adv., impermanence n.] impetuous* (im PET you is) adj. acting or done suddenly, with little thought; sudden; rash; impulsive • Janet’s volunteering to join the posse was an impetuous act on her part and took everyone by surprise. • Buddy was impetuous when he suddenly joined the army, and he had two years to reflect on the act. [-ly adv., -ness n.] [Syn. sudden]
impious (IM pee uhs) adj.
1. lacking reverence for God; 2. lacking respect or sense of obligation toward one’s parents
• When Bill made impious remarks, he was rebuked by Sister Kathleen. • It was impious of Cara to abandon her father to a state-run nursing facility and wash her hands of him.
[-ly adv., -ness n.]
implement (IM pli MINT) vt.
1. to put into effect; to fulfill; accomplish; 2. to give the means of carrying out something —n. 1. a tool, utensil, or device used to accomplish some task; 2. any tool or person used to accomplish some end
• It took some restaurateurs weeks to implement the ban on smoking in restaurants. • Airline pilots will be trained in the use of firearms to implement the new aircraft security policy. • A spade is only one implement used in gardening. • An electric drill is the preferred hole-boring woodworking implement.
[-ed, -ing, -ation* n.]
implication (IM pli KAY shn) n.
1. an involvement or connection with something, such as a crime; 2. a showing to be involved with something; 3. something implied, from which an inference can be made
• Charlie’s lawyer agreed to his client’s giving testimony in exchange for the prosecution’s dropping any implication that Charlie had been involved in the crime. • I resent your implication that I had any connection to your home’s having been vandalized. • The seller made no implication that could be construed as a warranty, other than that provided by the manufacturer.
imply (im PLY) vt.
1. to suggest; indicate indirectly; hint; intimate; 2. to involve naturally; to have as a needed condition or part
• Jack did not mean to imply that you lacked intelligence. • Your having taken the bicycle from the park implies that the bicycle was in the park in the first place.
[implied, -ing, implies pl.] [Syn. suggest
impound (im POWND) vt.
1. to take and hold or shut up (an animal) in a pound; 2. to take and hold (a vehicle, money, papers, etc.) in legal custody
• The pug was impounded for seven days to make sure that he had no dangerous illnesses. • Francine’s car was impounded until $435 in overdue parking tickets were paid.
[-ed, -ing]
impression (im PRESH in) n.
1. a mark or imprint caused by physical pressure; 2. an effect formed in the mind or senses by some force or activity; 3. a vague notion, feeling, or recollection
• When you sit on the sofa, your derriere makes an impression in the cushion. • Rosa’s demeanor gave Pietro the impression that she would welcome an invitation from him to the prom. • Howard had the impression that he’d seen all this before.
[Syn. idea]
impressive (im PRES iv) adj.
tending to have or having a significant effect on the mind; wondrous; causing admiration
• Irwin’s ability to lift 350 lbs. can only be called impressive. • Marjory displayed an impressive command of spelling at the national spelling bee.
[-ly adv., -ness n.]
improve (im PROOV) vt.
1. to make better; improve the condition or quality of; 2. to make more valuable (as in by cultivating or building on land)
• New spark plugs improve the way some cars run. • Keeping the amount of salt low improves the healthfulness of soup. • When Virginia improved her property by building the boathouse, she was not surprised to see her taxes go up.
[-d, improving] [Syn. better]
impugn (im PYOON) vt.
to criticize or challenge as false or questionable in nature
• The defense witness was called to impugn the testimony of an earlier prosecution witness. • The interview with Ari’s eighth-grade teacher was enough to impugn Ari’s reputation for honesty.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. deny]
impulse (IM puhls) n.
1. a driving force; push; impetus; thrust; sudden urge; 2. an inclination to act, without premeditation; a motive coming from within
• An impulse caused by the forced ejection of hot gases drives a jet engine. • The impulse of his push made her fall from the cliff. • Around midnight, Barbara had a sudden impulse to eat a pistachio icecream cone.
[impulsive adj., impulsively adv.] [Syn. thrust
impute (im PYOOT) vt.
to ascribe; to attribute (especially a fault or bad deed) to someone; to charge with
• Film historians impute the phrase “Never give a sucker an even break” to W. C. Fields. • Bugsy Seagal is imputed with being the first to recognize Las Vegas as a potential vacation destination. • Chicago’s bloody gang wars of the early twentieth century are often imputed to Al Capone.
[-d, imputing] [Syn. ascribe] incinerator* (in SIN oer AY tir) n. someone or thing (especially a hightemperature furnace) that is used to burn things (from the verb, incinerate) • The man or woman burning the fallen leaves in a garbage can to get rid of them is probably the most universally known incinerator. • Commercial incinerators are today required to meet standards to limit pollutants escaping into the air.
incompatible (IN kuhm PAT i bil) adj.
1. not able to exist in harmony; not getting along well together; inharmonious; 2. two or more jobs that cannot be held at the same time by the same person; 3. contradictory tenets or positions
• A 220V air conditioner’s plug is incompatible with a 115V electrical outlet, grounded or otherwise. • The jobs of prosecutor and judge are totally incompatible—you can’t do both simultaneously. • Contrary to popular myth, cats are far from incompatible with dogs.
[incompatibly adv., incompatibility n.
incompetent (in KAHM pit int) adj.
1. lacking adequate ability, fitness, etc.; incapable; 2. not meeting legal qualifications
• The 240-pound, 45-year-old Anna was proclaimed incompetent to become an astronaut. • Warren demonstrated his incompetent driving skills by parking his car in the grocery store’s soda aisle. • Although he had received 6 years of medical training, without a license, Dr. Pepper was incompetent to practice medicine in New York.
[-ly adv., incompetence, incompetency n.]
incomprehensible (IN kahm pri HEN si bil) adj.
not capable of being understood; unintelligible; obscure
• When Julianna mumbled, what she had to say was completely incomprehensible. • The incomprehensible plan for the democratization of Xanadu was not understood by anybody.
[incomprehensibly adv., incomprehensibility n.]
inconsequential (in KAHN si KWEN chil) adj.
unimportant; trivial; of no consequence
• When compared to the Allies’ landing at Normandy in 1944, Gino’s landing at Palmer Mall in 2004 was inconsequential. • Although considered a great invention in its own day, when balanced against the microcomputer, sliced bread seems inconsequential.
[-ly adv.]
inconsistent (IN kuhn SIS tint) adj.
not in agreement; not uniform; selfcontradictory; changeable
• Given the facts that the police already knew, Arnold’s story could only be described as inconsistent. • Fishermen’s tales tend to be inconsistent, with the size of the fish growing in each retelling.
[-ly adv.]
incorporate (in KAWR pir AYT) vt.
1. to join with something already there; to combine; to embody; to include; 2. to merge or bring together to form a single entity; 3. to form into a legally organized group that acts as a single entity
• When the batter is well mixed, it’s time to add the egg yolks, one at a time until each is incorporated. • Many smaller single-purpose companies incorporate the multimeda giants of today. • By incorporating, a company is able to protect its officers from personal liability for its misdeeds.
[-d, incorporating] [Syn. embody, include]
indecorous (in DEK oer is) adj.
lacking propriety; lacking correctness; not in good taste; unseemly
• Arthur’s indecorous display of foul language at the ballpark indicated that he’d had a few too many beers. • The army frowns upon indecorous behavior by anyone in uniform—this is the main reason it employs MPs.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. improper
indicate (IN di KAYT) vt.
1. to point to or point out; direct attention to; 2. to be or to give a sign or token of; signify
• The dashboard light indicates that a door is open. • Uncle Sam’s pointing finger in the old recruitment signs served to indicate that the one he wanted was you. • An engagement ring is usually a good way to indicate that one is serious about another.
[-d, indicating] indifference* (in DIFF oer ens) n. a lack of concern, interest, or feeling; apathy; the condition of being indifferent • The parking valet’s indifference toward the wishes of his clients was reflected in the paucity of his tips. • Tania’s concerns about her sister’s well-being were met with indifference by the part-time night nurse. • Indifference is the last reaction that a concerned person wishes to encounter.
indignation (IN dig NAY shin) n.
righteous anger; anger at injustice, unfairness, or ingratitude
• Rhonda expressed her indignation at the shabby way her father was treated by the car dealer. • The attentive waiter expressed his indignation to his boss at the paltry size of the gratuity the last diner had left.
[Syn. anger
indomitable (in DAHM it i bil) adj.
not easily discouraged or subdued; unbeatable; not conquerable
• Jim’s indomitable spirit kept him in the race against all odds. • Nancy’s determination to reach her goal was indomitable.
[indomitably adv.]
ineffable (in EF i bil) adj.
1. overwhelming; too great to be described in words; 2. too awesome or sacred to be spoken
• The orchid’s ineffable beauty defied Sue’s ability to describe it. • The parishioner could not bring himself to speak the ineffable name of the Lord.
[ineffably adv.]
inefficacious (in EF i KAY shuhs) adj.
unable to bring about the desired result; not efficacious
• The special vitamins given to the horse to make it run faster proved to be inefficacious. • It was obvious that the lawn treatment had been inefficacious when the new crop of dandelions appeared.
[-ly adv.]
inefficient (IN if ISH int) adj.
failing to give the desired result with a minimum use of energy, time, etc.; not suited to perform the desired task; incapable
• The engine was inefficient because it used a lot of fuel to accomplish the job. • A fork, while excellent for eating steak, is quite inefficient when it comes to eating soup.
[-ly adv., inefficiency n.]
inexorable (in EGZ oer IB il) adj.
1. unmovable by persuasion, argument, or entreaty; unrelenting; 2. unchangeable; unstoppable
• Steven was inexorable in his support for universal medical coverage, despite all who argued against it. • Undeterred by dire weather reports and unrelenting cold, Amundsen pursued his inexorable trek to the South Pole.
[inexorably adv.]
infer (in FOER) vt.
1. to decide or conclude something from something that is known or assumed; to derive by reasoning; 2. to indicate indirectly; to lead to a conclusion; indicate
• From your knowledge of human behavior and that of Fred in particular, you should be able to infer whether he deliberately misled Wilma and Pebbles. • The fact that Barney had both motive and opportunity might lead one to infer that he had something to do with the doughnut’s disappearance.
[-red*, -ring, -ence n.] [Syn. deduce, conclude]
infinite (IN fin it) adj.
1. lacking in boundaries or limits; without beginning or end; 2. very great; vast; immense
• The realm of natural numbers is infinite, with neither beginning nor end. • Do you think people are destined to explore the infinite vastness of intergalactic space?
[-ly adj.] [Syn. immense, endless
inflammatory (in FLAM uh TAW ree) adj.
1. causing or likely to cause anger, excitement, violence, etc.; 2. of or characterized by redness as a reaction by the body to some irritant
• The revolutionary’s speech was inflammatory and was calculated to incite the crowd to action. • Poison ivy is inflammatory to the skin of anyone who is allergic to it.
[inflammatorily adv.]
influence (IN floo INS) n.
1. the ability of a person(s) or thing(s) to affect others as evidenced by the effect; 2. the power of persons of wealth or high status to cause immediate change —vt. to effect the behavior, development, nature, etc. of others
• Harold’s influence was evident in Marcy’s choice of chocolate layer cake. • Billionaire Vilo Kvetch used his influence to get a No Parking sign installed in front of his Park Avenue mansion. • It is easy to see sunlight influence the direction in which day lilies face as they follow it across the sky.
[-d, influencing] [Syn. power]
information (IN foer MAY shin) n.
1. a telling of or being told something; 2. something learned; news; intelligence; 3. facts; data; lore
• Iris just got the latest information from the travel agent. • The more information you have on a subject, the easier it is to make an intelligent choice. • Telephone information can be obtained (for a fee) by dialing one of several sources. inhibit* (in HIB it) vt. 1. to restrain or hold back from some action; 2. to keep back; keep in check • Smoking cigarettes tends to inhibit one’s ability to participate in strenuous sports. • Fear of needles inhibits many people from volunteering to donate blood.
[-ed, -ing, -ion n.] [Syn. restrain, retard]
innocuous (in AHK yoo is) adj.
1. that does no harm or injury; harmless; 2. not controversial or oppressive; innocent; uninspiring and dull
• The butterfly is an innocuous insect that hurts neither plant nor animal. • The president’s speech was innocuous, treading on nobody’s toes and generally boring the audience to sleep
innovative (IN OH vay tiv) adj.
1. the act or process of finding new methods; 2. a new method, custom, device, etc.
• Luther Burbank was an innovative person who bred many new varieties of fruits, vegetables, and flowers. • Freeze-drying is an innovative way of preserving foods, invented in the second half of the twentieth century.
[-ly adv.]
inordinate (in AWR din it) adj.
1. not regulated or orderly; 2. lacking in moderation; too great
• There are an inordinate number of bakeries throughout the United States. • An inordinate number of students are not up-to-date on completing their homework assignments.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. excessive]
inquiry (IN kwir ee or in KWY ree) n.
1. the act of seeking information; 2. an investigation or looking at something; 3. a question or questioning
• Marshall made an inquiry among his new neighbors before deciding on where to bank. • An inquiry by the NHTSA followed the oil truck accident. • The grocery cashier made an inquiry of each of her customers as to whether (s)he had found everything (s)he came to buy
insight (IN syt) n.
1. the ability to intuitively grasp the inner nature of things; 2. a clear understanding of the inner nature of a certain thing
• Henry’s insight made it possible for him to tell the quality of any cabinet’s construction. • Lois’s long experience with cats and dogs gave her insight into why Libby was whining and whether to call the vet.
[-ful adj., -fully adv.]
insipid (in SIP id) adj.
1. tasteless; unflavored; 2. dull; lifeless; lacking tang or zest
• The lukewarm cup of weak tea was absolutely insipid without lemon or sugar. • Byron had an insipid personality, sort of like a piece of wet toast. • Last night’s insipid party’s most exciting moment was its ending.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. banal, vapid, flat; Ant. zestful, spicy]
insolent (IN suh lint) adj.
strongly disrespectful; impertinent; impudent in speech and behavior
• Jack was expelled from school for being insolent with his teachers and with the school administrators. • Insolent behavior while in the armed services is a sure ticket to the brig.
[-ly adv., insolence n.] [Syn. impertinent, proud]
instill (ins TIL) vt.
to put in little by little, or drop by drop; to impart a thought, idea, principle, etc. gradually
• It takes many lessons to instill a child with the proper way to treat other people. • Farah was not quick to grasp the principles of driving a car, and it took her instructor 25 lessons to instill the skills she needed to pass her licensing exam.
[-ed, -ing, -ment n.]
institution (IN sti TOO shin) n.
1. an established law, custom, etc.; 2. an instituting establishment; 3. an organization having a public character, such as a school, church, bank, etc.; 4. the building housing such an organization
• The Bill of Rights is an institution that has survived many assaults by lawmakers over the years. • The institution of daylight saving time is not observed in all the contiguous 48 states. • An institution of higher learning is ideally a place for a free exchange of ideas. • The savings and loan institution is on the corner of Third and Main streets.
instrument (IN struh mint) n.
1. a tool; something or someone used to do something; 2. any of many kinds of devices used to measure (temperature, wind, electricity, etc.); 3. a device that produces a musical sound; 4. a legal document
• A spading fork might well be the most versatile garden instrument. • A pilot’s instruments tell the speed and altitude of the aircraft as well as the plane’s attitude. • When asked to choose an instrument to play, Benny picked the clarinet. • A letter of credit is a financial instrument.
[-al adj., -ally adv.] [Syn. implement
integrate (IN te GRAYT) vt.
1. to make whole or complete by bringing parts together; 2. to unify; 3. to remove the social barriers of racial segregation; 4. (math) to calculate the integrals of an equation
• A laptop computer integrates monitor, CPU, and keyboard into a single compact package. • The European Union integrates the economic power of Europe into a formidable force. • To racially integrate the South was a great undertaking of the 1960s. • To learn to integrate equations, study calculus.
[-d, integrating, integration n.] integrity* (in TEG ri tee) n. 1. wholeness; entirety; 2. the quality of being in perfect condition; soundness; 3. the quality of being morally sound; uprightness; honesty; sincerity • The fuel tank’s integrity survived the car crash. • A plumber checks the integrity of a gas line by spraying it with a soapy solution and watching for bubbles. • A person’s integrity can often be measured by the trust of others.
intellectual (IN ti LEK tyoo il) adj.
1. pertaining or appealing to the ability to reason (intellect); 2. activities of the intellect; 3. having or showing superior reasoning powers —n. a person of intellect and learning
• The game of chess has often been looked at (incorrectly) as an intellectual training ground. • Karen has demonstrated particularly keen intellectual powers when it comes to solving a mystery.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. intelligent
intemperate (in TEM per uht) adj.
1. not moderate; lacking in restraint; excessive or severe; violent; 2. consuming too large a quantity of beer, wine, liquor, etc.
• Lloyd was intemperate in his gambling, never missing an opportunity to place a bet. • Diane’s disposition was intemperate, being quick to anger at the slightest perceived slight. • Rocco is an intemperate drinker, often ending up sloshed.
[-ly adv.]
intense (in TENS) adj.
1. very strong; extreme; sharp; vivid; 2. strenuous; fervent; strained very hard; 3. showing or having strong emotion; being very serious
• The poet’s words created an intense image of warfare. • The effort he put into pulling on the rope was intense. • Paula had an intense desire to become a professional musician.
[-ly adv.]
interest (IN toer EST) n.
1. a claim to or share of something; 2. an involvement; 3. a concern
• Charlie had an interest in a bicycle repair shop on Elm St. • Vicki’s calling Bob upset Anne, who had her own interest in him. • A good teacher always takes an interest in the welfare of his or her students.
intermission (IN toer MISH in) n.
1. a time period between acts in a play or half innings in a baseball game; 2. any pause between periods of activity
• The intermission between play acts, or entre acte, is a good time to stretch one’s legs. • In the intermission between halves of the seventh inning comes baseball’s traditional seventh-inning stretch. • An intermission between periods of fighting is always a welcome time during any war.
interpretation (in TOER pri TAY shin) n.
1. the meaning, expression, or explanation of something; 2. one person’s take on the meaning of some work (of art, literature, etc.); artistic expression
• The interpretation of The Iliad from its ancient Greek has happened many times over. • Freud’s forte was the interpretation of the meanings of dreams. • Two violinists’ interpretations of a Beethoven sonata might differ greatly.
intervention (IN toer VEN shin) n.
1. the act of coming between; 2. any interference in the affairs of others, whether people, companies, or countries
• It often takes the intervention of a third party to keep two boxers apart at the weigh-in. • The United States has gained a reputation for its frequent intervention in the affairs of Central American countries. • The confrontation of a drug user by his friends to get him into rehab is known as an intervention
intimidate (in TIM id ayt) vt.
1. to make afraid; daunt; 2. to deter or compel with threats of violence; cow
• It is easy to intimidate little children, but it’s not very sporting. • Mobsters have been known to intimidate potential witnesses against them to deter them from testifying.
[-d, intimidating, intimidation, intimidator n.]
intrepid (in TRE pid) adj.
not afraid; bold; fearless; very brave
• Actors who play Roman gladiators appear to be intrepid. • The Marines who fought on Iwo Jima were intrepid indeed. • Are you intrepid enough to ride a big roller coaster?
[Syn. brave]
intrigue (in TREEG) vt.
1. to bring on by secret plotting; 2. to excite the curiosity; fascinate —n. 1. a secret or underhanded plotting; 2. a secret plot; 3. a love affair
• Brutus and Cassius intrigue to kill Julius Caesar in Shakespeare’s take on the subject. • A cliff-hanger intrigues one to find out what will come next. • The intrigue of Quisling’s fifth column betrayed Norway. • Many believe the death of JFK was the result of intrigue. • Tracy and Hepburn’s intrigue lasted many years.
[-d, intriguing] [Syn. plot]
intrinsic (in TRIN sik) adj.
essential nature; not depending on outside sources; inherent
• Gold has always had an intrinsic value as a precious metal. • Some, but not all, believe that good is intrinsic to all people. • The intrinsic nature of children is innocence.
[-ally* adv.]
intrusion (in TROO zhin) n.
1. the act of forcing one’s self or ideas on another who has not asked for and/or does not welcome them; 2. (law) the illegal entry onto another’s land; 3. (geology) the squeezing of magma between layers of solid rock; the actual solidified rock so created
• Eric’s intrusion into the girl’s locker room was not greeted with amusement. • Tresspassing is one form of illegal intrusion; burglary is another. • Volcanic intrusions can be found in some museums’ geological exhibits.
intuitive (in TOO it iv) adj.
1. having to do with intuition (a direct and immediate understanding or learning of something without use of reasoning); 2. learning or knowing by such a feeling
• Ginny seemed to have been born with an intuitive grasp of how to ride a horse. • Alan found driving an automobile to be intuitive and was driving like an old-timer the first time he took the wheel.
[-ly adv.
inundate (IN uhn DAYT) vt.
1. to cover with flood water; to engulf; 2. to overrun with a rush or copious amount of anything
• As the dam burst, the town below it was inundated by a raging torrent of water. • Business has been so busy that the work is beginning to inundate our employees.
[-d, inundating, -s* pl.]
invaluable (in VAL yoo UH bl) adj.
priceless; too valuable to measure
• Joy’s babysitting help during our recent emergency was absolutely invaluable. • Taking the PSAT exam last year was an invaluable warm-up for this year’s SAT test.
[Syn. costly]
investigative (in VES ti GAY tiv) adj.
1. of or inclined to look into the facts to find an answer; 2. inclined to investigate
• Investigative reporters spend most of their time doing research and a much smaller portion reporting. • A branch of medicine is devoted to investigative research to discover how certain drugs work to cure illnesses.
[-ly adv.
investigator (in VEST i GAY tir) n.
a person who gathers information, confidential and otherwise, for an individual, a company, or an organization (governmental or other)
• When someone has an auto accident, the insurance investigator’s job is to find out what or who caused the accident. • Many detective stories have been written about fictional private investigators who are for hire.
invigorate (in VIG uh RAYT) vt.
to fill with energy or vigor; to enliven
• A brisk walk after dinner often serves to invigorate one. • Sailors claim that nothing invigorates like a sea breeze.
[-d, invigorating*] [Syn. animate]
inviolable (in VY uh li bl) adj.
1. not to be profaned, injured, or violated; sacred; 2. unable to be violated; indestructible
• The Geneva Conventions contain certain inviolable rules for the humane treatment of prisoners of war. • The laws of nature are the only rules on earth that are truly inviolable.
iridescent (I rid ES int) adj.
having or showing a rainbow of colors that shift as it is looked at from different angles
• An abalone shell lying on the beach seems to have an iridescent gleam when struck by a bright light. • Metallic car finishes often appear iridescent in sunlight.
ironic (ay RAH nik) adj.
1. meaning the opposite of what is said; 2. given to saying the opposite of what one means
• Isn’t it ironic how Kenny always does the opposite of what he says he’s going to do? • Reverse psychology is ironic in that one tells the child to do the exact opposite of the desired behavior.
[-ally adv.]
irrational (i RASH in uhl) adj.
1. lacking the power to reason; 2. unreasonable; absurd; senseless
• There is no point in arguing with two-year-olds because they are almost always irrational. • Adele’s irrational behavior led to her being taken to the psychiatrist for examination.
[-ly adv., -ity n.] [Syn. unreasonable]
irrelevant (i REL iv ent) adj.
not relating to the subject; not pertinent; not to the point
• When the doctor asked you whether you had any allergies, your reply about what your grandmother used to cook was completely irrelevant. • When purchasing a sport jacket, the size of your feet is irrelevant.
[-ly adv., irrelevance n.
irresponsible (I ris PAHN si bl) adj.
not liable for certain actions; unreliable; shiftless
• The judge ruled that Dorothy was irresponsible for Rose’s broken eyeglasses. • Driving an automobile after having a few alcoholic beverages is an irresponsible act. • I would never hire the guy who installed my sink again; he’s just too irresponsible.
[irresponsibly adv.]
irreverence (i REV er rins) n.
1. lack of respect or reverence; 2. an act showing lack of respect; 3. a person’s being treated with same
• Some comedians’ stock in trade is speaking of serious matters with irreverence. • It is not a good idea to show irreverence for the power of a chain saw— especially when using it. • Very few parents appreciate their teenaged children’s irreverence toward their wishes. isolate (AY suh LAYT for vt., adj., AY suh lit for n.) vt. to set apart from others; to cause to be alone —adj. of or relating to something that has been set apart —n. a person or group that has been set apart • If you are a chess player, the last thing you want is for your opponent to isolate your king from his protection. • Accidentally leaving a child home alone is one isolated instance (in more ways than one). • When a solid is precipitated out of a solution or suspension, that solid is called the isolate.
[-d, isolating]
isolation (AY suh LAY shin) n.
the condition of having been set apart; being alone
• To prevent the spread of infection, a carrier of an infectious disease is often placed in isolation. • Isolation is often the best place for an inmate who is a danger to others.
[Syn. solitude
jaded (JAY did) adj.
1. worn out; weary; tired; 2. satiated or dulled from overindulging
• After having studied all night, Amber was jaded by morning. • Having handled hundreds of homicide cases over the years, the detective’s view of humanity has become rather jaded. • The social worker tried not to be jaded at each new family abuse case she encountered, but it was difficult.
[-ly adv.]
journal (JOER nil) n.
1. a daily record of events; diary; 2. the records of an organization’s transactions; ledger; 3. a newspaper, daily or otherwise
• Daniel Dafoe’s Robinson Crusoe is in the form of a journal kept by a castaway on a desert island. • The treasurer of any corporation must keep a journal of all the financial transactions. • Many local newspapers contain the word journal in their names, like New York City’s lamented Journal-American.
judge (JUHJ) vt.
1. to hear arguments and decide the outcome; 2. to decide the outcome of a contest; 3. to form an opinion; to estimate; 4. to criticize —n. 1. a public official elected or appointed for purposes of vt. #1 and #3; 2. a contest decider; 3. one qualified to form an opinion or to criticize; 4. a critic
• In most civil cases, a jury is not used, and a single person must judge the merits of the case. • Would you like to judge a contest to determine the most beautiful pig? • You judge which of the two chairs is more comfortable. • Do you judge the new automobiles as being of higher or lower quality than last year’s models? • The position of judge is considered one of great trust. • The judge will decide which pie is tastiest. • Years of experience are required to refine one’s taste buds to the point where (s)he can qualify as a judge of fine wines. • When it comes to movies, everyone’s a judge.
[-d, judging, -ment n.] [Syn. decide]
judicial (joo DISH il) adj.
1. pertaining to judges, courts, or their functions; 2. enforced or set by order of a court or judge; 3. suitable to or like a judge; 4. fair and unbiased
• Laws are passed and signed subject to judicial review. • For a search warrant to be valid, it must bear a judicial signature. • Strict codes of behavior govern judicial proceedings. • A court must follow judicial procedures evenhandedly.
justice (JUHS tis) n.
1. impartiality and fairness; 2. the quality of being correct; right; 3. sound reason; validity; 4. deserved results; reward or penalty for good or bad deeds, respectively; 5. procedure of a court of law; 6. a judg
• Justice must be meted out equally to all; anything else is unjust. • Justice must allow no favoritism of any kind. • Justice requires that the good be rewarded and the evil be punished. • The courts of law in this country are charged with administering justice. • A justice of the peace has the power to perform weddings.
justify (JUHS ti fy) vt.
1. to show to be right; vindicate; 2. to supply lawful grounds for; warrant —vi. 1. to show sufficient reason for doing something; prove; 2. to align a row or rows of type on a page
• The town cited the fire hazard caused by old wiring to justify upgrading its electrical code. • Law officers must present a judge with some evidence of wrongdoing to justify getting a wiretap warrant. • Mr. Jones must justify his having cut down Mrs. Smith’s oak tree. • The lines of type on most papers that you submit in school are justified on the left.
[justified, -ing, justification n.]
juxtaposition (JUHX tuh puh ZISH in) n.
placed side by side or close together
• Words that modify other words should be placed in juxtaposition to the words they modify. • When returning home after grocery shopping, it is preferable to place the trunk of the car in juxtaposition with the door to your house nearest the kitchen.
knowledge (NAH lij) n.
1. information; awareness; understanding; 2. acquaintance with the facts; 3. the complete body of information; enlightenment
• Do you have any knowledge of the whereabouts of Waldo? • It is important to have a thorough knowledge of the facts before reaching any conclusion about them. • An encyclopedia attempts to catalog all the knowledge of mankind, and it does it alphabetically for convenience
lame (LAYM) adj.
1. disabled or crippled, especially in one or both legs; 2. stiff and painful; 3. weak; unconvincing; ineffectual
• When Lucy fell off the horse and hurt her leg, there was a danger that she might be lame for life. • While running the bases, Sebbie came up lame and had to limp off the field. • “The dog ate my homework” is universally recognized as a very lame excuse.
[lamer, lamest, lamely adv.]
languid (LANG wid) adj.
1. lacking vitality; drooping; weak; 2. lacking interest; 3. indifferent; sluggish
• After his bout with mononucleosis, Jim was languid for a number of weeks. • Ian’s interest in mathematics is lacking and can best be described as languid. • Kathy was unprepared for her trip to Quebec because of her languid attempts to learn enough French.
[languidly adv., languidness n.]
latent (LAY tint) adj.
hidden; present but not visible; inactive —n. a fingerprint left at a crime scene
• Brown-eyed Jose carries a latent blue eye color gene. • Ali has a latent desire to dress like a fireman.
[-ly adv., latency n.] [Syn. potential, quiescent]
lavish (LA vish) adj.
1. very generous in spending or giving; 2. more than enough; abundant —vt. to give or spend abundantly on
• A lavish amount of green paint was used to cover the brown front lawn. • Jim’s friend Shaila was lavish in her gifts to him. • All the wedding guests lavished attention on the new bride.
[-ed, -ing, -ly adv., -ness n.] [Syn. profuse]
legislation (LEJ is LAY shin) n.
1. the act or process of making a law; 2. the law itself
• Congress is currently considering legislation to require all citizens to keep physically fit. • The process of legislation usually takes a fairly lengthy amount of time. • There is no legislation requiring that all children be fed ice cream for dessert, but that doesn’t mean it’s a bad idea.
legislator (LEJ is LAY tir) n.
one who makes laws; a member of a legislative body, such as an assemblyman, a congressman, or a senator
• Legislators are elected for a specific length of time. • A U.S. senator has the longest term of any American legislator, namely 6 years.
[Syn. lawmaker
legitimacy (li JIT im is ee) n.
the quality of being legally correct; lawful; sanctioned by law or custom; reasonable and just
• Don’t give anybody your personal information online, unless you’re 100% certain of that person’s legitimacy. • The legitimacy of backroom poker games is doubtful. • The legitimacy of Virgil’s tracing Rome’s history back to the Trojan War is questionable but artful.
[Syn. lawfulness] levee* (LEV ee) n. 1. a retaining wall built beside a river to prevent flooding; a dike; 2. a landing place on the riverbank; 3. a ridge of earth built around a field that is to be irrigated • Levees are common sights on the lower Mississippi River. • If you’re planning to take a riverboat, you just might find yourself on the levee, waiting for the Robert E. Lee.
liberal (LIB ir el) adj.
1. not restricted; 2. generous; 3. plentiful; ample; abundant; 4. not limited to the literal meaning; 5. tolerant of views other than one’s own
• A loose-fitting sweatshirt allows one a liberal amount of arm movement. • The mayor was liberal in his praise for the fire department. • Tina put a liberal amount of strawberry jam on her roll. • Some judges have a liberal interpretation of the meaning of the law. • A university is a place for a liberal exchange of viewpoints.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. progressive (in the political sense)]
library (LY bre ree) n.
1. a collection of books, films, magazines, CDs, etc., especially a large one that is systematically arranged; 2. a public or private institution in charge of such a collection; 3. the building in which the aforementioned is housed
• The Library of Congress is one serious collection. • One of the greatest losses to Western civilization was the burning of the Library at Alexandria (Egypt, not Virginia). • Helene and Judy met to do some reading at the public library.
linchpin (LINCH pin) n.
1. a pin that goes through the outer end of an axle to prevent the wheel from falling off; 2. anything that holds the parts of a whole together
• Most automobiles use cotter pins as their linchpins. • Evers was the linchpin of the Cubs great double-play trio, Tinkers to Evers to Chance. • The keystone is the linchpin or the true arch.
literal (LIT oer il) adj.
1. having to do with letters of the alphabet; 2. word for word; following the exact words or meaning of the original; 3. interpreting things according to their precise meaning
• Placing something in literal order is another way of saying alphabetizing. • Ben was very literal, so when his girlfriend told him to “go jump in the lake,” he went looking for a lake to jump into. • Only a few sects nowadays live their lives according to a literal interpretation of Holy Scripture.
[-ly adv.
literary (LIT oer ER ee) adj.
1. having to do with books or writing; 2. tending toward the more formal, polished language of writing rather than that of everyday speech; 3. familiar with or well versed in literature (the classics)
• A library can be thought of as a living museum of literary works. • It is doubtful that anyone ever spoke in the literary language that characterizes Shakespeare’s plays. • A literary critic must have enough experience to be able to judge a work against many other examples.
literature (LIT er uh TYUR) n.
1. all writings in prose or poetry, especially of an imaginative nature, without regard to their merit, distinguished from those of scientific writing, reporting of news, etc.; 2. those writings considered to have lasting merit, either because of their excellence of form or the value of their examples; 3. printed matter of any kind
• The literature of the late twentieth century runs the gamut from the philosophy of the existentialists to the adventures of Harry Potter. • The classics of literature comprise a number of books that have survived for centuries and are still being reproduced. • Among the less lasting literature of recent years, we must count the billboards extolling the merits of certain drinks
litigant (LIT i gnt) n.
a party to a lawsuit
• The two litigants entered the courtroom to plead their cases before Judge Judy. • The first litigant was a bride, suing the dress alterer for having ruined her wedding.
livid (LIV id) adj.
1. discolored by a bruise; 2. lead colored often taken to mean whitish or pale; 3. very angry; enraged
• Lori’s elbow was livid where she had bumped it. • Barney’s face went livid, as if he had seen a ghost. • When Joe saw that he had been charged for the use of the limousine that had not shown up, he became livid with rage.
[-ity, -ness n.] [Syn. pale]
loathe (LOHTH) vt.
to feel intense disgust or distaste for; detest; despise
• Dina absolutely loathed the combination of green and pink. • Don’t you just loathe being asked where you’d like to eat and then ending up at your friend’s choice of restaurant? • As a general rule, country-and-western music lovers loathe hip-hop.
[-d, loathing] [Syn. hate]
lobbyist (LAHB ee ist) n.
a person in the employ of a special interest group who tries to persuade legislators or government administrators to act in the interest of his/her employers
• It used to be very difficult to get antismoking bills passed because of the strength of the tobacco lobbyists. • The word lobbyist is peculiarly American and originated with people buttonholing legislators in the lobby of the Capitol building on their way to vote on or debate a bill.
logo (LOH goh) n.
a distinctive company symbol, trademark, etc. that is designed to be associated with that company only and to get instant recognition for that company
• A good logo evokes the name of the company without the need to spell it out. • The dog listening to the gramophone horn with the words “his master’s voice” remains a logo of RCA. • Another well-recognized logo is the stylized “3M” of the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Corp.
longevity (lawn JEV i tee) n.
1. long life span; length or duration of lives; 2. length of time spent employed or in service to a single company or individual
• The normal longevity of a dog is about 15 years but is shorter for larger dogs. • The longevity of a running back’s career in the NFL is less than 5 years
lubricant (LOOB ri kint) n.
a substance for reducing friction by being spread on one or both of the moving parts to form a film between them; grease, oil, or graphite
• The use of axle grease as a lubricant in wheel hubs greatly extends the longevity of both wheel and axle. • If left uncorrected, the loss of lubricant from a car engine will surely doom the engine.
lubricate (LOOB ri kayt) vt.
1. to make slippery or smooth; 2. to put a lubricant onto or into —vi. to act as a lubricant
• It used to be standard practice at each oil change to lubricate the car’s ball joints. • This practice is no longer followed because most automotive ball joints these days are self-lubricating.
[-d, lubricating]
lurid (LU rid) adj.
harsh or shocking; vivid; sensational; shocking
• Tabloids love to feature lurid stories on their front pages to attract the attention of impulse-buying shoppers. • Nothing is as welcome at the box office as a lurid story about an ax murderer or a cannibalistic doctor
machination (MAK in AY shin) n.
a secret or artful plot, usually one having evil intention (usually plural)
• The machinations of the KGB have made for some pretty exciting spy novels. • The Odessa File tells of the machinations of an organization designed to further the cause of the Nazis after the war.
[Syn. plot]
malediction (MAL I DIK shin) n.
1. a curse or the calling down of an evil spell on someone; 2. evil talk about someone; slander
• Giving one the evil eye is one form of malediction popular among some European cultures. • Certain Caribbean cultures carry out their maledictions through the use of effigies called voodoo dolls. • The newspaper story about Henry’s drug misuse was a malediction worthy of a healthy sized lawsuit. malinger* (muh LING oer) vt. to feign illness or injury to avoid work; to shirk • They have a name for malingering in the army; it’s goldbricking. • One who malingers and gets a reputation for so doing is not likely to remain employed for very long, unless, of course, his/her employer is his/her parent.
[-ed, -ing, -er n.]
mallet (MAL it) n.
1. a kind of hammer usually with a head of wood (used to drive a chisel) or of hard rubber (used to bang out dents in sheet metal); 2. a longhandled hammer with a cylinder-shaped head used for playing croquet or one with an even longer handle used for playing polo; 3. a small, wooden hammer with a round head used to play xylophone, marimba, glockenspiel, bells, etc.
• The body-shop worker uses a rubber mallet to hammer out small dents. • A polo mallet has a very long handle because each player must strike the ball while seated on a horse. • Wooden mallets with ball-shaped heads are used to strike the keys on a xylophone. mandate* (MAN dayt) n. 1. an authoritative order, usually in writing; 2. the overwhelming wishes of an elected official’s constituents, regarded as an order —vt. to require, as by law • As a result of World War I, mandates to rule certain areas that used to be parts of the Ottoman Empire were issued by the League of Nations. • The shop foreman has a mandate from ownership to require each worker to put in 16 hours of overtime. • Senator Strong’s overwhelming victory is a mandate for him to pursue equal rights for women. • The new law mandates a $300 fine for overtime parking.
[-d,* mandating
manual (MAN yoo il) adj.
1. of or having to do with the hands; 2. without electrical or other power assist; 3. not automatic (as in an automotive transmission) —n. 1. a book of facts or instructions; 2. any of several organ keyboards; 3. a drill for handling certain weapons
• A carpenter needs good manual dexterity. • Most old-fashioned wells have a manual crank that lifts a bucket on the end of a rope. • To drive a car with a manual transmission, you must learn how to use the clutch. • Don’t throw out your DVD manual; you never know. . . . • The fingers operate the manual on an organ, while the feet play the pedals. • A good soldier must learn the manual of arms.
manuscript (MAN yoo skript) adj.
1. handwritten or typed, but not printed; 2. writing consisting of unconnected letters; not cursive —n. 1. a book or document written by hand; 2. a copy of an author’s work submitted to a printer or publisher; 3. writing, as apart from printing
• Your report needs to be at least four pages of manuscript, double-spaced if typed. • Manuscript is the style of writing we first learn, before we are taught to write in cursive. • Until the printing press was invented, all books were manuscripts. • Any manuscript submitted to a publisher should be accompanied by an SASE (self-adressed stamped envelope).
mar (MAHR) vt.
to injure or damage so as to disfigure; spoil; impair; hurt the appearance
• With her key, Joan marred the finish on Bud’s car. • The cries of protesters marred the president’s appearance at the convention.
[-red, -ring]
mastery (MAS tir ee) n.
1. control; rule; 2. the upper hand in a struggle; victory; 3. expert skill or knowledge; 4. accomplishing success in understanding something
• Agassi had complete mastery on the tennis court. • In the battle between the sexes, women achieve mastery about 60% of the time. • Glenn’s lack of mastery of the guitar is what caused his audience to leave the recital during the intermission. • Kim’s years of practice had led to mastery of the art of karate
materialism (muh TIR ee uhl i zm) n.
1. the philosophical doctrine that everything in the world is matter, and even thought, will, and feeling can be connected to matter (the opposite of idealism); 2. the notion that possessions, wealth, and comfort are the most important things in the world; 3. the tendency to be more concerned with material things than with the intellectual or spiritual
• The philosophy of materialism enjoyed some popularity in the nineteenth century. • The idea of materialism permeates some of the work of pop singer Madonna—especially in her song “Material Girl.” • When a person pursues someone of the opposite sex because of the latter’s wealth, that is a display of materialism.
[materialistic adj., materialistically adv.]
mathematical (MATH i MAT i kl) adj.
1. of, concerned with, or about mathematics; 2. precise; rigorously exact
• We all need some sort of mathematical education. • A high-quality diamond must be cut with mathematical precision.
maverick (MAV rik) n.
1. a stray calf; any unbranded livestock; 2. a person who takes an independent stand or a position different from that of the rest of his group
• One of the jobs of a cowboy on a drive is rounding up mavericks. • A maverick politician often votes against the official position of his party’s leadership.
maxim (MAX im) n.
a concisely worded statement of truth or rule of conduct
• “A stitch in time saves nine” is a well-known maxim. • “Do unto others as you would have others do unto you” is a maxim we should all live by.
[Syn. saying]
meaning (MEE ning) n.
significance; import; what is intended to be conveyed, signified, or indicated —adj. 1. intending; having purpose; 2. significance
• Only time will tell us the meaning of today’s world events. • Sally was meaning to tell Harry how much she cared. • Barbara’s locket’s meaning was a reminder of her mother.
[-ly adv.]
means (MEENZ) n.
1. the way in which something is done; agency; 2. available wealth; resources; 3. great wealth
• He had the means to get over the top of the fence. • Margie had the means to buy the very best silver. • The CEO of the software company is a woman of great means
media (MEE dee uh) n.
all means of communication, such as radio, television, cinema, and print matter that provide the public with news and entertainment
• Most of the media in the United States are driven by advertising dollars. • Since the advent of television, the roles played by the print media have tended to become more specialized.
mediocre (MEE dee OH kir) adj.
1. of average quality; not too good, not too bad; 2. inferior; not good enough
• The quality of prime-time TV shows has, over the years, been mediocre, with the best shows airing after 10 P.M. • For the most part, packaged supermarket baked goods are mediocre when compared with freshly baked goods.
melee (MAY lay) n.
1. a noisy or confused struggle or brawl among a number of people; 2. a confused mixture
• After the first half of watching the football game at the tavern, a melee broke out among the patrons. • Sangria is a melee of citrus fruits and red wine served over ice.
melodrama (MEL uh DRAH muh) n.
1. a play or film concerned with exaggerated conflict and sensational overacting stereotypical characters; 2. any sensational hyperemotional acting, utterance, etc
• Melodrama is typical of daytime soap operas, with lots of gesticulating and grand gestures. • Silent films were filled with melodrama in contrived scenes such as the heroine’s being tied to the tracks as the train approaches.
[-tic adj., -tically adv.]
memorable (MEM uh ri bl) adj.
worth remembering; notable
• Lou Gehrig’s farewell address was a memorable moment in sports history, as was Jackie Robinson’s breaking baseball’s color line. • September 11, 2001, is probably as memorable a date for today’s generation as was December 7, 1941, for the World War II generation.
[memorably adv., memorability n.]
mentor (MEN tir) n.
1. a wise advisor; 2. a teacher, coach, or active role model —vi., vt. to act as an advisor or teacher
• Athenian philosopher Aristotle was a mentor to Alexander of Macedon, also know as Alexander the Great. • Julius Caesar was a mentor to Octavian, who later became the first Roman emperor, Caesar Augustus.
merely (MEER lee) adv.
no more than; only; and nothing else
• Fishing is thought by some to be merely a blood sport rather than a form of relaxation. • Mighty Mouse is merely a muscular mouse in yellow and red tights and cape. metamorphose* (met uh MAWR fohz) vt. to change in form or in nature; to transform; to undergo metamorphosis • The caterpillar can be seen to metamorphose into a moth or butterfly. • A tadpole will metamorphose into a frog or toad. • Now metamorphose your frown into a smile; it uses fewer muscles.
[-d, metamorphosing] [Syn. transform] metaphor* (MET uh fawr) n. a figure of speech containing an implied comparison, but not using like or as (which would make it a simile), for example, “raining cats and dogs,” but not “that pepper is as hot as fire” • Metaphor is skillfully used by Shakespeare, although it is sometimes mixed as in “. . . to take arms against a sea of troubles and by opposing drown them.” • A metaphor is like a simile, which is what the first part of this sentence is.
methodical (meth AH dik uhl) adj.
orderly and systematic
• The surgeon proceeded with the operation in a methodical manner. • The floor waxer was methodical, making sure that he got every square inch of the room.
[methodic adj., -ly adv.] meticulous* (mi TIK you luhs) adj. extremely careful about detail; paying careful attention; scrupulous • The model builder was meticulous in his attention to getting the rigging just right. • The chef was meticulous in making sure that no raw meat came in contact with ingredients meant for the salad
miffed (MIFT) vt.
(past) offended; put out of good humor
• Walter was miffed at his shoddy treatment by the produce supplier. • Audrey went to school in a good humor but was soon miffed at what she heard.
[miffing, (to) miff vi., vt.]mimicry* (MIM ik REE) n. 1. the practice, art, instance, or way of imitating; 2. a close resemblance in color, form, or behavior of one organism to another, or of an organism to an inanimate object in its environment (for the purpose of concealment) • Many great comedians have developed their comic senses of timing through mimicry of the late Jack Benny. • For the chameleon, mimicry of the color of its environment is the way in which it protects itself, keeping it hidden from potential predators.
mineral (MIN oer il) n.
1. an inorganic substance in nature with certain physical and/or chemical properties; such a substance that is organic in origin, such as coal; 2. ore; 3. anything not animal or vegetable; 4. any element needed by plants or animals for growth, like oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorous, iron, etc.
• It’s odd to consider coal to be a mineral because millions of years ago it was alive. • Veins of minerals like gold and silver can be chipped from surrounding rocks. • Ocean water is rich in minerals as well as in animal and plant life. • The mineral most necessary for all existing life is oxygen
misgiving (mis GIV ing) n.
qualm; doubt; apprehension; disturbed feeling of doubt
• Did you ever have misgivings about going to a certain place or event? • Richard had no misgivings about having been to the Rock Festival at Woodstock.
[Syn. qualm]
mishap (MIS hap) n.
accident; an unlucky or unfortunate occurrence
• Running into the lamppost was just a mishap. • When you’re dressed up, it’s a good idea to drink nothing but colorless liquids, in case a mishap causes your drink to land on your clothes.
[Syn. accident]
misleading (mis LEED ing) adj.
leading in the wrong direction; deceptive —vt. 1. leading to error; deceiving; deluding; 2. influencing badly; leading to wrongdoing; leading astray
• When the electronics clerk said he’d have the part in by the next morning, he was being misleading. • The directions included with the invitation were misleading because they omitted the mention of one turn. • Jackie’s mom wanted her to avoid having friends with poor study habits, worrying they might be misleading her with their careless ways.
[(to) mislead vt., misled p., -ly adv.] [Syn. deceive]
missing (MIS ing) adj.
absent; lost; lacking; missing after combat but not known to be dead or captured
• The missing-man formation is used by combat pilots to honor a lost comrade. • Frank was missing at his class’s morning roll call.
mitigate (MIT i GAYT) vt.
to lessen; to make or become less severe; to moderate; to make or become less rigorous or painful
• The doctor told Gail to take aspirin to mitigate the pain. • The severe weather of the past week will mitigate as the cold front comes through. • Repeated exercise will mitigate the stiffness in your joints.
[-d, mitgating] [Syn. relieve]
mock (MAHK) vt.
1. to ridicule or expose to scorn; 2. to imitate as in having fun or deriding; to make fun of; 3. to defy and lead to futility —n. an imitation or counterfeit —adj. false; imitation; sham
• It’s traditional for teenagers to mock each others’ actions. • Dottie mocked Dan by putting on a baseball cap at a cocked angle and speaking in her lowest vocal range. • The castle mocked the invading army’s attempts to storm its walls. • Most New York street scenes seen in older movies are mock, having been shot on a studio back lot. • Mock turtle soup does not harm any turtles, mock or otherwise.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. imitate, ridicule
moderation (MAH doer AY shin) n.
1. bringing within bounds; 2. avoiding excesses or extremes; 3. calmness; absence of violence
• Everything should be done in moderation, including moderation itself. • Partying in moderation means that you’re likely to have a good time and to remember it the next day. • Both parties to the dispute acted with moderation so that no fighting erupted.
modicum (MAH di kim) n.
a small amount; a bit (with of )
• Grandpa likes to tell tall tales, so take everything he tells you with a modicum of salt. • You need not use a lot of ground pepper when seasoning your roast; usually just a modicum is needed.
modulate (MAHD yoo LAYT) vt.
1. to adjust or to regulate to the appropriate degree; 2. change the pitch or intensity, usually to a lower level; 3. (radio) to vary the amplitude or frequency of a wave’s oscillation in accordance with some signal
• One must modulate what to expect from a child in accordance with the child’s age. • A great opera singer is one with the ability to modulate his or her voice. • AM radio is amplitude modulated, while FM is frequency modulated.
[-d, modulating, modulator n.] momentous* (moh MEN tis) adj. very important; of great moment • The Wright Brothers’ first powered flight, in 1903, was a momentous occasion for human travel. • Deciding whether or not to apply to college is a momentous decision. [-ly adv.
monarch (MAH nahrk) n.
1. hereditary ruler, such as a king or queen; 2. the best; 3. the top performer in a certain field
• Henry VIII and Edward VIII were the highest numbered monarchs of England. • Elvis Presley is called the king, which makes him the monarch of rock. • Wal-Mart is the monarch of retail sales.
monopoly (muh NAH pi lee) n.
1. exclusive control of a type of product or service; 2. exclusive possession of something
• Before its being broken up into the so-called “Baby Bells,” AT&T had a monopoly in the telecommunications business. • Under President Teddy Roosevelt, antitrust legislation was passed to prohibit monopolies from getting a strangle hold on any one industry. • Two-year-olds Jakob and Myles have a monopoly of their mothers’ time.
[monopolies pl.] [Syn. trust, cartel]
morality (maw RAL i tee) n.
1. code of proper behavior according to traditions, religious laws, etc.; 2. the property of rightness in conduct or ethics
• The code of morality in the Western world is based on the Judaeo-Christian tradition. • The treatment of certain prisoners in Iraq violated the dictates of morality.
morose (maw ROHS) adj.
1. bad tempered; sullen; gloomy; 2. distinguished by gloom
• A morose comic character walks around with a dark cloud over his head wherever he goes. • When asked what the probability was of staying out of the course of the storm, the pilot’s facial expression was morose.
motivation (MOH ti VAY shin) n.
an incitement or impelling; the cause that makes someone do something
• Looking down the barrel of a gun is usually an adequate motivation to hand over your money. • A method actor needs some sort of motivation to get into the role of the character he’s playing.
motive (MOH tiv) n.
an inner drive that causes a person to do something, or to act in a certain way; goal
• Greed is often a good motive for robbery. • The motive for Arnold’s saving every nickel he earned was his desire to purchase an automobile.
muffle (MUH fil) vt.
1. to dull a sound; stifle; 2. to wrap in a shawl or blanket to deaden a sound
• Each motor vehicle contains a special part designed to muffle the roar that the engine makes, but we won’t tell you its name. • A scarf wrapped around someone’s mouth and lower face is often referred to as a muffler, in that it muffles any speech coming from the wearer’s mouth. • Murderers on TV often use silencers to muffle the sound of the gunshot.
[-d. muffling
mundane (muhn DAYN) adj.
1. earthly, as distinguished from heavenly or spiritual; 2. ordinary; everyday
• The clergy of the Middle Ages lived much more mundane lives than their calling might have led one to expect. • The peacock is an outstandingly beautiful bird, while the pigeon is considerably more mundane.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. earthly]
munificent (myoo NIF is int) adj.
1. very generous; giving lavishly; 2. distinguished for great generosity
• Andrew Carnegie was noted for his munificent donations to artistic causes. • John D. Rockefeller’s descendants have proven very munificent in trying to distribute some of the wealth that the family’s patriarch amassed from his businesses.
[-ly adv, munificence n.]
museum (myoo ZEE im) n.
a room, institution, or building for displaying and/or showcasing artifacts, works of art, or items associated with a person, activity, etc.
• Museums can be as different as the District of Columbia’s Air and Space Museum and its National Museum of Natural History. • The Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, New York, is a museum devoted exclusively to the sport of baseball.
musing (MYOO zing) adj.
meditative; pondering —n. meditation; reflection
• Yolanda was in a musing frame of mind as she thought over the day’s events. • Yoga teaches the benefits of musing for a set amount of time each day.
[-ly adv.]
muskrat (MUHS krat) n.
1. any of the various glossy, brown-furred American rodents with a musky odor that are adapted by webbed hind feet for living in water; 2. such an animal’s fur
• Muskrats have been known, as have other rodents, to carry disease. • Imitation mink coats are usually made of muskrat.mutter* (MUH dir) vi. 1. to speak in a low, indistinct voice; 2. to complain —vt. to say something in low, often angry tones • Neil tended to mutter, and it was necessary to pay very close attention to make out what he was saying. • Laura muttered to the floor cleaners about what a shabby job they had done. • When Sebastian saw what he owed in income taxes for the year, he began to mutter profanities.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. murmur]
myriad (MI ree uhd) n.
a very large number; countless; innumerable; a great number of persons or things
• Look up in the sky on a clear night away from city lights, and you’ll find a myriad of stars and other glowing bodies. • Myriads of ocean worshippers flock to the seaside each summer
mystifying (MIS ti FY ing) adj.
1. puzzling; bewildering; perplexing; 2. made obscure or difficult to understand
• There is something mystifying about a man wearing a cape and carrying a walking stick. • Many claim that the income tax code is mystifying by design rather than circumstance.
[-ly adv., mystification n.]
mythical (MITH i kil) adj.
1. imaginary; fictitious; not scientifically proven; 2. existing only in myths
• The fact that the refrigerator’s light goes out when the door is closed is considered mythical by some children (and by some adults). • A dragon is a mythical creature, which never really existed.
naive (nah EEV) adj.
1. innocent; unworldly; childlike; unsophisticated; 2. unsuspicious; credulous
• Lara was too naive to know what to order at the French restaurant, so she trusted Buddy to order for her. • Vic left his portable DVD player on the front seat of his open convertible and was naive enough to expect that it would still be there when he returned.
narcissistic (NAHR si SIS tik) adj.
loving one’s self; having an excessive interest in one’s own appearance, comfort, importance, etc.
• Nancy is narcissistic enough to spend 6 hours every day in front of a fulllength mirror. • Hector is wealthy enough to be able to afford his narcissistic nature, having hired six full-time servants to see to his every need.
[-ally adv., narcissism n.]
narrative (NA ruh TIV) adj.
1. in story form; taking the nature of a narration; 2. occupied with narration —n. a story; tale
• H. G. Wells’s The Time Machine is a narrative told from the vantage point of the machine’s inventor. • “Call me Ishmael” is the opening sentence of Melville’s Moby Dick and introduces the reader to the identity of the narrative’s teller. • In Hemingway’s The Old Man and the Sea, it is unclear whose narrative the tale is.
[Syn. story]
nefarious (ni FAER ee uhs) adj.
very wicked; underhanded; most villainous; iniquitous
• The Spanish Inquisition used nefarious means to identify so-called heretics. • Joseph McCarthy was nefarious in his “red baiting” tactics during the 1950s communist witch hunts.
[-ly adv., -ness n.
negligible (NEG li jib il) adj.
small enough to be disregarded; hardly noticeable; trifling
• The difference between a 30-gram and a 29-gram portion of flour is negligible to the naked eye. • The ineffective diet that Shaila was on for 7 weeks had a negligible influence on her weight.
[negligibly adv.]
nitpicker (NIT pik oer) n.
one who finds fault with petty details; one who pays too much attention to little things that shouldn’t ordinarily matter; one who is petty or overly finicky
• Mrs. Higgins was a real nitpicker and would deduct points from an essay for every undotted j or i in a handwritten creative paper. • To nitpick originally meant to pick tiny nits (lice eggs) out of someone’s hair by using a comb or tweezers; it’s not too hard to see how nitpicker today describes someone who obsesses over tiny details.
[nitpick vi.]
nomenclature (NOH min KLAY chir) n.
1. a set of names that is peculiar to a particular field (for example, ROM and RAM in computers) or terms exclusive to biology or another science; 2. the act or system of naming
• In the nomenclature of computers, ROM is read-only memory, while RAM is random-access memory. • A dele is a deletion, parens are parentheses, and a graph is a paragraph in the nomenclature of proofreading.
nonchalance (NAHN shuh LAHNS) n.
the state or quality of not showing warmth or interest in something; coolness; showing a lack of concern
• Beth greeted the news of Amy’s marrying her old boyfriend, John, with nonchalance. • There was an air of nonchalance on the face of the killer as he mowed down the nest of termites with his spray gun.
[Syn. equanimity]
nondescript (NAHN dis KRIPT) adj.
1. hard to classify because of a lack of recognizable qualities; 2. dull; uninteresting
• Kenny drove a nondescript car from the mid to late ’60s. • The only way Jim could describe Edna’s neighborhood was shabby, but as for any particular features, it was just nondescript.
novel (NAH vil) adj.
new; unusual —n. a relatively long piece of fictional prose with a complicated plot
• The Fosbury Flop was a rather novel approach to the high jump track-andfield event. • When it comes to recreational reading, Marianne finds a novel much more satisfying than a book of short stories
obdurate (AHB dyoo RAYT) adj.
1. not easily moved to feeling empathy; 2. not readily giving in; stubborn; inflexible
• Despite his tenants’ having a difficult time coming up with the rent, Simon Legree was obdurate in his intention to evict them. • Although Susan tried to get her employer to allow her to work flexible hours so that she could take some courses, the manager remained obdurate in insisting she stick to a fixed schedule.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. inflexible]
oblique (oh BLEEK) adj.
1. Neither vertical, nor horizontal, but slanting; 2. indirect rather than to the point; 3. evasive and underhanded
• The hypotenuse of a right triangle is always oblique to both of the triangle’s legs. • Despite Joe’s trying to get a direct answer from his supervisor as to whether his taking vacation time would impair his chances of promotion, the supervisor’s answers remained oblique. • The lawyer tried to pin Alice down on how much of the conversation she had overheard, but she was oblique in most of her responses.
[-ly adv., -ness n.] obscurity* (ahb SKYUR i tee) n. the condition or quality of being difficult to perceive, hard to see, not well known, vague, or ambiguous • Because the soldier had taken care to completely camouflage his position, despite the enemy’s closeness, his presence remained in obscurity. • Elvis’s presence at the top of the pop music scene elevated him to the limelight from near obscurity. • The obscurity of the wording of the contract made it difficult to determine what was expected from either party. [obscurities pl.]
observation (AHB zir VAY shin) n.
1. the following or keeping a law, custom, principle, etc.; 2. a noticing of something; 3. being seen or noticed; 4. the noting and recording of facts; 5. a comment or remark
• The observation of the Sabbath was a key part of Allan’s upbringing. • Helen’s observation of a stranger near her car made her suspicious. • The burglar kept low to the ground, hoping to elude everyone’s observation. • Kenny’s observations during the chemical experiment were kept in his chemistry notebook. • Rosa noticed the mismatch of Pedro’s socks and could not help making an observation to him.
[Syn. remark
obsessiveness (ahb SES iv nis) n.
1. having the nature of being haunted by something; 2. a being preoccupied by some emotion, thought, desire, etc. in defiance of reason
• His obsessiveness with being right all the time has driven away all his friends. • Xavier has pursued excellence in the field of motorsports with an obsessiveness that can only be described as being driven (no pun intended).
obstacle (AHB stik il) n.
anything that gets in the way or hinders; impediment; obstacle; barrier
• Police barriers are obstacles meant to keep fans back from parades during festive occasions. • Lack of a high school diploma or equivalency diploma can be a real obstacle to getting a college degree.
obstreperous (ahb STRE pir us) adj.
noisy, unruly, or boisterous, especially in one’s opposition to something
• College students at a fraternity party generally turn obstreperous after a couple of hours. • The opposition party member was obstreperous in his outcry against the position of the prime minister.
[Syn. vociferous]
offensive (aw FEN siv) adj.
1. attacking; 2. designating the side that is seeking to score in a contest; 3. aggressive; 4. unpleasant; disgusting; repugnant
• In the game of chess, white always starts out on the offensive, even though it doesn’t always remain such. • In volleyball, the offensive side is the one with the serve. • Offensive action is needed to clean up toxic waste sites. • A skunk’s odor is extremely offensive to most.
office (AWF is) n.
1. a function or duty assigned to someone; 2. a post or position of trust and/or authority; 3. any government branch; 4. the room, suite, or building occupied by people in definition #2 or #3
• Seeing to it that packages were shipped out on time was the office assigned to Stanley. • It was Hillary’s desire to change things that caused her to run for office. • The post office sees to the delivery of the mail six days a week and rests on the seventh. • The senators’ offices are for the most part, unsurprisingly, in the Senate Office Building.
[Syn. position, function]
onerous (OH nir is) adj.
1. laborious; burdensome; 2. more burdensome than rewarding
• The onerous task of cutting wood for the winter is tedious as well as difficult; that’s what makes it onerous. • A job that requires a great amount of energy and pays a very small return is onerous. • Slave labor is the perfect example of onerous work
opponent (uh POH nint) n.
a person against one in a fight, argument, debate, etc.
• The navy will carry the fight to our opponent. • The opponents sat across the chess board from each other. • Sometimes we must sit down with our opponents and try to work things out.
[Syn. adversary, enemy, foe]
opportunity (AHP oer TOO ni tee or AHP oer TYOO ni tee) n.
1. a good chance; 2. a set of circumstances favorable to
• Every person deserves an opportunity to succeed. • Billy is looking for an opportunity for advancement. • The United States has been called the land of opportunity.
[opportunities pl.]oppression* (uh PRESH in) n. 1. a weighing heavily on the mind, spirit, or soul; worry; troubling; 2. a keeping down by cruel or unjust use of power; 3. a feeling of being weighed down as with worries or problems • Oppression can have a paralyzing effect on a person’s ability to act. • The oppression of slavery was a terrible weight on many Americans prior to the Civil War. • The oppression of separate-but-equal educational opportunities that were inherently unequal was not legally terminated until almost a century after the Civil War. [oppressive adj., oppressively adv.
optimism (AHP ti mi zm) n.
1. the belief that good triumphs over evil; 2. the tendency to take the most cheerful point of view or hope for the best possible outcome
• If you believe that bad will be vanquished and good will win in the end, then you are a practitioner of optimism. • Optimism permits one to look at a half empty container of chocolate milk and see it as half full.
[optimistic adj., optimistically adv.]
orator (AW ruh tir) n.
1. a person who delivers a formal public speech; 2. an eloquent public speaker
• An orator was a person who impressed and swayed his listeners before the days of telecommunication. • Cicero was perhaps the orator of greatest fame to emerge from the senate of ancient Rome.
[oration n.] [Syn. declaimer]
orchard (AWR chird) n.
1. an area of land set aside for the raising of fruitbearing trees; 2. such a stand of trees; a grove of fruit trees
• Peach orchards dot the countryside in certain parts of Georgia. • In New York’s southern Catskill Mountains, it is common to find roads lined by apple orchards.
orchestra (AWR kes truh) n.
1. the main floor of a theater; 2. a large musical ensemble, specifically a symphony orchestra; 3. the instruments of definition 2
• As a general rule, the most expensive seats in the theater are the front and center orchestra seats. • The United States is fortunate to have at least five world-class symphony orchestras. • The instruments of the orchestra are divided into strings, brass, woodwinds, and percussion.
ordain (awr DAYN) vt.
1. to order; establish; decree; 2. to predestine; predetermine; 3. to invest with the office of a rabbi, minister, or priest
• In 1789, the framers ordained the U.S. Constitution to be the law of the country. • Some people believe that the future is ordained, and no matter what we do, we can’t change it. • New clergypersons are ordained, usually from among the ranks of the seminarians.
[-ed, -ing, -ment, ordination n.]
origin (AWR i jin) n.
1. a beginning; a coming into existence; 2. the birth; lineage; parenthood; 3. that in which something has its root, source, cause, etc.
• The Nile River’s origin is in Lake Victoria. • The origin of the practical home computer can be traced to Steve Wozniak’s garage. • Musical drama with fixed songs and story lines had its origin with the operas of Giuseppi Verdi.
[Syn. source, inception
originality (uh RIJ in AL i tee) n.
1. the quality or condition of never having occurred before; 2. the ability to be creative or inventive
• The person who wrote “Roses are red, violets are blue, monkeys are hairy, and so are you” can hardly lay claim to having any originality. • When it comes to cooking contests, originality in use of seasonings usually plays a large part in determining the winner.
ornate (awr NAYT) adj.
1. heavily adorned, often to excess; 2. showy or flowery, as in some musical or literary styles
• Corinthian capitals (column tops) are known for their exceptionally ornate decoration. • Paganini was an exceptionally gifted violinist, and some of his compositions are so ornate that nobody else can play them.
orthodox (AWR thuh DAHKS) n.
1. conforming to the established beliefs and doctrines (as in religion, politics, etc.); 2. designating any of the churches of the Eastern Orthodox Church
• The orthodox politician makes it a point not to offend any potential voters. • Admiral Yamamoto’s unorthodox reliance on aircraft carriers was the main reason for early Japanese successes in World War II. • The Catholic Church celebrates Easter at a different time from the Orthodox Church.
[-y* n.] [Ant. unorthodox]
ostensible (ahs TEN sib il) adj.
apparent; seeming; professed
• There was an ostensible misunderstanding between the valet parking attendant and his client. • An ostensible difference of opinion exists between those voting for one candidate and those supporting the other.
[ostensibly adv.] ostentatious* (AHS tin TAY shuhs) adj. showy display of wealth or learning; pretentious • The lobby of the Ritz Carlton Hotel can only be described as slightly ostentatious, as one would expect. • As a Harvard graduate, Andrew felt it necessary to place his diploma in an ostentatious frame in his law office. [-ly adv., ostentation n.]
ostracism (AHS truh sizm) n.
barring; banishment; excluding (from the ancient Greek word ostra, for a shard of pottery)
• In ancient Athens, a man’s name might be written on a broken piece of pottery, and if enough ostra had his name on it, an ostracism took place; that is, he was banished. • Ostracism is a rather cruel form of social punishment.
[ostracize v., ostracized, ostracizing] [Syn. banish]
outcast (OWT kast) n.
one cast out; a person or thing rejected by society
• One who has been ostracized is an outcast. • Persons serving jail time for having committed crimes can be considered social outcasts
outcome (OWT kuhm) n.
result; consequence
• When a coin is tossed, there are two possible outcomes. • The outcome of a day at the beach is too often a sunburn.
[Syn. effect
palette (PAL it) n.
1. a thin board, usually with a thumbhole, on which an artist mixes paint colors; 2. the colors used by a certain artist for a certain painting or paintings
• An artist’s palette usually contains only the colors that he is using to make a particular painting. • During Picasso’s blue period, his palette was heavily tilted in the direction of that color.
pallid (PAL id) adj.
pale; wan; faint in color
• Margaret had been out of the sun for so long that her face had taken on an unhealthy, pallid color.
[Syn. pale]
pantomime (PAN tuh MYM) vt.
1. a play or presentation wherein the characters perform actions and gesticulate, but speak no words; 2. an actor or actress who performs in this way; 3. actions and gestures without words used as a means of expression
• It is customary in Japanese Kabuki theater for characters to pantomime while made up in whiteface. • In Mel Brooks’s Silent Movie, everyone pantomimed except for the famous mime Marcel Marceau, who spoke the only word. • Pantomiming is a way of conveying information to one’s teammates in the game of charades.
[-d, pantomiming]
paramount (PA ruh mownt) adj.
ranking above all others; utmost; chief; supreme
• A child’s education, both intellectually and socially, is of paramount importance to society. • The meaning of what they say is not paramount for the French; rather, it’s how they pronounce it.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. dominant]
parasite (PA ruh syt) n.
1. one who lives at the expense of others and contributes nothing in return; 2. an organism that lives on or in another, getting nourishment from the host but contributing nothing useful and sometimes causing harm, for example, a leech
• Sometimes their maternal instincts cause women to take in parasites who prey upon their better nature. • Tapeworms are parasites that can live inside a person’s intestines and take all the nourishment ingested for themselves.
[parasitic adj., parasitically adv.
parboil (PAR boyl) vt.
1. partially boil to cut down on final cooking time, usually as a precursor to roasting; 2. to make uncomfortably hot; overheat
• Frozen vegetables are parboiled for a minute or more before freezing—a process known as blanching. • Saunas are excellent places for parboiling people.
[-ed, -ing]
parch (PARCH) vi.
1. to expose to great heat; 2. to dry up from heat; make hot and dry; 3. to make or be very thirsty
• The peppers were parched by their stint on the grate of the charcoal grill. • Tomatoes are often parched by sun-drying, which both wrinkles them up and intensifies their flavor. • After two hours in the boat, Roxane was parched and reached for a bottle of iced tea.
[-ed, -ing]
parenthetical (PAR in THE ti kl) adj.
1. contained in parentheses; 2. interjected as explanatory or qualifying information; 3. using or containing parentheses
• The source of the article was parenthetical. • Hailee was a very talented artist, and the parenthetical inclusion of her age, five, was just for the viewers’ information. • Often, as in the last sentence and in this one, parenthetical information is enclosed between commas.
pariah (puh RY uh) n.
1. an undesirable; one despised and rejected by others; an outcast; 2. a member of the lowest social caste in India
• The pariahs in India comprise a caste known as “the untouchables.” • The soldiers returning home from the Vietnam War were treated as pariahs by much of the American public.
parish (PA rish) n.
1. an administrative district of many churches; 2. the members of the congregation of any church; 3. in Louisiana, the equivalent of a county in any other state
• A British local government’s territory is often identical with the size of the original church parish. • On any given Sunday, about half the members of the parish show up for church. • In Louisiana, the state is carved into local parishes that are equivalent to counties in all the other states.partisan* (PAHR ti zin) n. 1. a person who takes one side or the other in a contest or dispute; 2. any of a group of guerrilla fighters —adj. 1. like or characteristic of a partisan; 2. blindly loyal • In the argument between Stan and Gilda, Fred was a partisan of Gilda. • Armed partisans have been common over the years in much of Central America. • Partisan politics tends to get in the way of Congress ever doing very much. • No matter what Carolina does, Rocio is partisan and follows her lead.
[Syn. follower]
passive (PAS iv) adj.
1. acted upon without acting back; 2. yielding; submissive; patient; 3. taking no active part
• When sanding a block of wood, the sander is the active participant, while the wood is passive. • Boxing is not a sport for a passive person. • In pleading not guilty to the charge of robbery, Bonnie insisted that she had been passive, driving the car but having no idea that a robbery had even taken place until the police pulled her over.
[-ly adv.]
paternal (puh TER nil) adj.
1. like or typical of a father; fatherly; 2. inherited from or related on the father’s side
• Willis, the pug, acted paternally toward both kittens. • Lois had inherited her hairy legs from her paternal side. • Natalie was a paternal aunt, being a sister of the child’s father.
[-ly adv.
pellagra (pil AG ruh) n.
a vitamin deficiency disease caused by a lack of adequate supply of Vitamin B6, characterized by skin eruptions, gastrointestinal problems, and mental disorders
• Pellagra is endemic in certain parts of the world. • Those who consume a lot of protein-rich foods need not be concerned with contracting pellagra.
penurious (pen YOOR ee uhs) adj.
1. unwilling to part with money; miserly; stingy; 2. very poor; in poverty
• Mythical King Midas had a well-documented history of being penurious. • Strangely enough, sharecroppers also have a history of being penurious but in the second sense of the word.
[-ly adv., -ness n.] [Syn. stingy]
perceive (poer SEEV) vt.
1. to mentally grasp; observe; take note of; 2. to become aware of through one of the senses
• The ant was able to perceive that when the spider invited her to dinner, she was the main course. • By the odor of food and hickory in the air, Raldo perceived that there was a barbecue nearby.
[-d, perceiving*] [Syn. discern]
perception (poer SEP shin) n.
1. the act of perceiving or the ability to perceive by means of the senses; 2. insight or intuition or the possession of either of them; 3. the idea, concept, or impression formed as a result of perceiving something
• The nose of the wine gave David the perception of ripe cherries and blackberries. • Despite knowing that they were meeting for the first time, Helene could not shake the perception that she knew him from somewhere.
perceptive (poer SEP tiv) adj.
1. of or capable of perceiving; 2. having sharp insight or intuition; penetrating
• It was extremely perceptive of Frederika to know who the real murderer was before completing even half of Agatha Christie’s tale. • Bruce was perceptive enough to tell from the interview that the position had already been filled and that the interviewer was just going through the motions.
[-ly adv.]
perfidy (POER fi dee) n.
a deliberate breaking of trust; faithlessness; treachery
• Susan could not belive Jonathan’s perfidy in seeing Daphne behind her back. • General Washington could scarcely believe Benedict Arnold’s perfidy in giving the British the plans to West Point.
[perfidious* adj., perfidiously adv.
performance (poer FAWR mins) n.
1. the act of doing something; accomplishment; execution; fullfillment; 2. effectiveness of operation; 3. some deed or feat done; 4. a presentation before an audience
• Jack Nicholson has won the Oscar for best performance by an actor on more than one occasion. • Running on clean oil improves the performance of your car’s engine. • The boxer’s manager was pleased with his performance in his last fight. • Lois and Barney attended last night’s performance of Cats.
perfunctory (poer FUHNK tir ee) adj.
1. done without care; done routinely; superficial; 2. indifferent; lacking in concern
• The mechanic gave a perfunctory look at the car before telling its owner that it needed a new muffler. • When told that she’d need to update her medical insurance coverage, Greta gave a perfunctory shrug.
[perfunctorily adv., perfunctoriness n.]
periphery (poer IF ir ee) n.
1. the edge; an outside boundary line; the perimeter; 2. an outside surface, especially of a spherical object; 3. the immediate surrounding territory; outskirts
• The airport was just at the periphery of the pilot’s field of vision. • One can usually tell if a basketball is properly inflated by squeezing its periphery and giving it a bounce. • The new mall is being built just at the periphery of the most heavily populated area.
[peripheral adj., peripherally adv.] [Syn. circumference
perishable (PER ish i bl) adj.
likely to spoil or deteriorate —n. something, especially food, that is liable to spoil
• The most perishable commodity in the cooler is the ice. • It is a good idea to refrigerate perishables, such as dairy products and meat.
permanence (POER min ins) n.
the quality or fact of lasting for a very long, if not indefinite, time without changing
• There is a certain permanence about a marble statue that long outlasts the person or event it celebrates. • Some permanence is desirable in laundry marks that go on your clothing.
permeate (POER mee ayt) vt.
to pass into or through and affect every part; infest —vi. to penetrate and diffuse
• It took three paper towels to clean up the spill, as the first two became totally permeated with liquid. • Rinna’s daughter sent her to college in hope that some learning might permeate her thick, yet porous skull.
[-d, permeating]
perpetrator (poer pi TRAY ter) n.
1. one who does something evil; doer of a crime; 2. one who commits a hoax or a blunder
• It is the job of the criminal justice system to lock up the perpetrators of criminal activities. • Mr. Brown hammered a nail between two panels of the chalkboard thereby becoming the perpetrator of the infamous skyhook hoax on his physics class.
[(to) perpetrate vt., perpetrated, perpetrating]
perpetuate (poer PET yoo ayt) vt.
to cause to continue; make perpetual; preserve from extinction
• The teacher strived to perpetuate the myth among her students that she had eyes in the back of her head. • Regular service intervals and tender care will perpetuate the useful life of your automobile.
[-d, perpetuating]
perplex (poer PLEKS) vt.
1. to puzzle; to confuse; to make one doubtful; 2. to make complicated or difficult to understand
• Finding the way to Red Riding Hood’s grandma’s house using the map perplexed the wolf. • Finding a general cure for cancer continues to perplex researchers.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. puzzle]
persevere (poer si VEER) vi.
to continue to make an effort despite opposition; to persist
• The Marines persevered in their attempt to climb Mt. Suribachi until they finally prevailed. • To attain one’s life’s goals, it is essential to persevere, regardless of the obstacles one might encounter.
[-d, persevering*
persistent (poer SIST int) n.
1. refusing to give up; unrelenting; stubborn; 2. lasting without change; 3. constantly repeated
• The usher was persistent in asking the noisy couple to leave the theater. • Yosemite Park’s El Capitan has been persistent in resisting the ravages of wind and rain. • Rote learning is the result of persistent repetition of the same information rather than understanding.
[-ly adv.]
persnickety (poer SNIK i tee) adj.
1. too fussy; too particular or precise; fastidious; 2. showing or needing very careful treatment
• Hazel was very persnickety about how her bedding was folded in the linen closet. • The persnickety Nurse Cratchett obsessed about the dressings on her home care patients.perspective* (poer SPEK tiv) n. 1. the artistic picturing of things so as to represent a three-dimensional portrait using two-dimensional drawings by use of lines that converge at a vanishing point; 2. the effect of relative distances on how objects appear; 3. the relationships and proportions of parts to each other and to the whole; 4. a point of view in judging things or events • The artist’s perspective makes things disappear in the distance, giving the viewer the feeling of three dimensions. • Perspective makes nearer objects appear larger than distant ones. • To avoid blowing things out of proportion, we must view them in the perspective of how they relate to the whole
perspicuity (POER spi KYOO i tee) n.
clear and easily understood; lucidity; clarity in statement and expression
• It is a talent to speak with perspicuity. • Perspicuity makes it easy to convey your ideas to others.
[perspicuous adj., perspicuously adv.]
persuasive (per SWAY siv) adj.
having the power to sway one’s opinion or tending to sway one’s opinion, beliefs, etc.
• Your argument against a national pickle-spotting hotline was not very persuasive to the gherkin lobbyist. • Over the course of time, the pen has proven to be much more persuasive than the sword.
pertinent (PER ti nint) adj.
to the point; connected to the matter under consideration; relevant
• When seeking a new veterinarian, one’s dog’s opinion might be quite pertinent. • A list of references and what they have to say could be pertinent to the hiring of a housekeeper.
pervasive (poer VAY siv) adj.
tending to spread throughout something or some group
• Malicious gossip can often be pervasive around the workplace, spreading in a matter of minutes. • The pervasive nature of some diseases is the reason for isolating any suspected cases.
[-ly adv., -ness n.]
pessimism (PES i mi zm) n.
1. expecting the worst at all times; 2. the philosophy that evil always triumphs over good
• Pessimism leads the driver to believe that the bridge is out just around the bend. • The expectation that bad instincts will win out over good ones is a sign of pessimism. • Pessimism makes one see the half-full glass as half empty.
[pessimistic adj.]
phenomenal (fe NAHM in il) adj.
very unusual; extraordinary; very remarkable
• The medical community has had phenomenal success with curing certain cancers. • Phenomenal advances took aviation from the Wright Brothers’ flyer to the space shuttle in less than 100 years
phenomenon (fe NAHM in ahn) n.
1. any event, occurrence, or happening that can be determined by the senses and scientifically explained; 2. any of the foregoing, explainable or otherwise
• The phenomenon of a total eclipse of the sun is readily explainable with a little knowledge of astronomy. • It is not so easy to dismiss all the reports of the phenomenon of alien abduction by people in many different parts of the world.
[phenomena pl.]
philanthropic (fil in THRAH pik) adj.
charitable; giving; benign; humanitarian; having a desire to help mankind
• Many of the great robber barrons of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries are known today for the philanthropic works of the foundations named for them. • Two such philanthropic organizations are the Carnegie and the Rockefeller foundations.
philosophy (fil AHS uh fee) n.
1. theoretical or logical analysis of the principles underlying thought, knowledge, conduct, and the nature of the universe—made up of ethics, logic, esthetics, epistimology, metaphysics, etc.; 2. the general or specific principles governing human character and morals
• Many different aspects of philosophy concerned the deep thinkers of the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries. • The philosophy of medical ethicists is ever more taxed in the twenty-first century. • Because logic is a branch of philosophy, it should be no surprise that French philosopher René Descartes gave us the Cartesian coordinates system of naming points by coordinates.
[philosophic adj., philosophically adv.]
phlegmatic (flig MA tik) adj.
difficult to rouse to action because of sluggishness, dullness, apathy, coolness, calmness, or stolidity
• The United States was very phlegmatic in its response to both European wars of the last century. • The United States was far from phlegmatic in getting involved with Iraq in 2003.
[-ally adv.] [Syn. impassive]
physicist (FIZ is ist) n.
a scientist dealing with the interaction of matter and energy (physics) whose parts are mechanics, optics, heat, light, and most recently quantum physics
• A physicist deals with lenses and the laws of refraction and reflection. • Newton’s laws of motion are the province of the physicist. • A physicist does not exactly deal with rocket science—er, wait a second; that’s exactly what a physicist might deal with
physiology (fiz ee AHL i jee) n.
1. the branch of medical science dealing with the functions and processes of various bodily organs in relation to the whole organism and each other; 2. the functions and processes of an organism and its vital organs
• It is not earthshaking to conclude that the physiologies of men and women are as different as they are alike. • The physiology of most organs must work together for an organism to be truly healthy.
[physiologies pl., physiological adj., physiologically adv.]
pigment (PIG mint) n.
1. the coloring matter, usually in the form of a powder or concentrate, that is mixed with a water or oil base to form paint; 2. a coloring matter in the cells of plants and animals —vi. to take on color
• Today, more often than not, pigments are mixed at the paint counter and added to a base to give thousands of possible shades of paint for your walls. • Even though it has another function, chlorophyll is the green pigment found in many plants. • A chameleon’s skin will pigment according to its environs.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. tint
pinion (PIN yin) n.
1. a small gear whose teeth fit into a larger rack to accomplish motion; 2. the last bony section of a bird’s wing —vt. 1. to disable by binding one’s arms; 2. to handcuff or shackle; 3. to cut off the pinions of a bird’s wing to prevent its flying
• The pinion makes possible the rack-and-pinion steering so prevalent in today’s sportier cars. • The pinions of a bird’s wings are often clipped by zoos to prevent the animals from flying the coop, as it were. • A capturing soldier often pinions his captive’s arms to prevent resistance. • A peacock’s wings are usually pinioned by a zoo’s curators, for reasons already mentioned.
[-ed, -ing]
placebo (pli SEE boh) n.
1. a harmless unpotent medication given to a patient to humor him or her, or used as a control in a blind test of medications; 2. something said or done to humor or win the favor of another
• Sometimes a placebo is given to a patient who would not benefit from a medicine, just to make him think he’s on medication. • Such a pill often makes a psychological difference to the patient, known as the placebo effect. • In tests of medicines, the control group is always given a placebo to see whether the medicine being tested has any significant effect.
plagiarize (PLAY jir YZ) vt.
to take ideas, writings, etc. from someone else and pass them off as one’s own
• Copyright laws exist to protect authors from having their intellectual property plagiarized. • Most plagiarizing is done by students writing papers, who claim some author’s or some encyclopedia’s words as their own.
[-d, plagiarizing]
pliable (PLY i bl) adj.
1. easily bent or molded; 2. easily persuaded or influenced; 3. adaptable
• Aluminum foil is quite pliable, and the heavy-duty kind is suitable for wrapping food for the freezer. • Some people are pliable enough to be easily convinced to buy “wonder products” they see in TV infomercials. • Some breeds of dog are pliable enough to be comfortable living in the Arctic or in mid-latitude climates.
[pliably adv.] [Syn. plastic]
pluralism (PLU ril i zm) n.
1. existing in more than one form; 2. the holding of more than one office by a single person; 3. a society made up of many diverse ethnic groups or groups from different cultural backgrounds
• Water exhibits a pluralism by existing as a liquid, a solid, and a gas, sometimes all at the same time. • There were times when a president of the United States demonstrated pluralism by being his own secretary of state. • The composition of the population of the United States is about as great an example of ethnic pluralism as can be found on earth.
[pluralistic adj., pluralistically adv.
poison (POY zin) n.
1. a substance that causes illness or death when eaten, drunk, or otherwise absorbed by the body; 2. anything destructive physically, emotionally, etc. —vt. 1. to give poison to; harm or destroy by means of poison; 2. to corrupt
• A cobra’s venom is one of the most powerful poisons in the animal world. • Propaganda is a poison that the Nazis and the Soviets were adroit at using in the middle of the last century. • Various pesticides are used to poison undesirable rodents. • Stereotyping certain ethnic groups can poison the attitudes of the impressionable toward them.
[-ed, -ing]
polar (POH lir) adj.
1. of, relating to, or near the South or North Pole; 2. of a pole; 3. having polarity; 4. opposite in nature or function
• The earth is not the only planet to have polar ice caps. • Magnets are polar, with unlike ones attracting and like ones repelling each other. • When installing batteries in a radio, you must pay attention to their polar alignment. • Optimists’ and pessimists’ philosophies are at polar extremes of the spectrum.
political (puh LI ti kl) adj.
1. of or about, politics, government, country, state; 2. relating to a definite governmental organization; 3. taking sides in political parties
• Political leaders are elected in some countries, appointed in others, and seize power by force in still others. • The secretaries of the cabinet are political appointees of the president but must be approved by the Senate. • Many votes in the legislatures are governed by political considerations.
[-ly adv.]
politician (pah li TISH in) n.
1. a person actively engaged in politics, often used derisively to mean scheming, after personal gain, etc.; 2. one particularly skilled in politics
• Politicians as a group do not enjoy a particularly good reputation, as they’re reputed to scheme in the back room. • Lyndon Johnson was a particularly skilled politician, who knew how to play the game to his best advantage.
pollution (puh LOO shin) n.
1. the result of defiling; making impure, corrupt, or dirty; 2. contamination with waste materials
• Industrial pollution has been considerably abated in California as a result of very strong environmental legislation. • Air and water pollution are probably the two forms of contamination most in the public eye.
[Syn. contamination]ponderous* (PAHN dir is) adj. 1. very heavy; 2. difficult to handle because of weight; 3. bulky; massive; seemingly heavy; 4. dull and labored • Harry and David found that the armoire was a ponderous piece of furniture to move. • Traditionally, and for obvious reasons, the refrigerator is the most ponderous appliance to move. • When not faced with a threat, the gait of the African elephant seems rather ponderous, as befits its size. [-ly adv.] [Syn. heavy]
poorly (POR lee) adv.
1. not well; not functioning properly; badly or ineffectively; 2. with a low opinion; disparagingly
• A myopic person sees far things very poorly. • When it comes to exams, Tom tests rather poorly. • Many people thought poorly of Ford’s Edsel, so the model didn’t last on the market for very long.
possessions (puh ZESH inz) n.
pl. 1. things owned; personal property; 2. property or wealth; 3. any territories ruled by another country
• All Rosanne’s possessions were destroyed in the fire. • The Hawaiian Islands and Puerto Rico were among the possessions acquired by the United States as a result of the Spanish-American War. • The territory of Transjordan was a possession of the British Crown until 1948.
[possession sing.
postscript (POHST skript) n.
1. a note added after the signature of a letter; 2. an afterthought or supplementary information
• A postscript in a letter is usually indicated by the initials P.S. on the line following the signature. • An epilogue can also be thought of as a postscript to a book or play.
potentate (POH tin tayt) n.
a person who has a great amount of power; ruler; monarch; emperor
• The sultan of Brunei is an Eastern potentate of considerable wealth. • The tsars of Russia were potentates until the end; recent British monarchs are not so.
poultry (POHL tree) n.
domestic fowl raised for eggs and/or meat; chicken, turkeys, ducks, and geese, collectively
• The poultry department in most supermarkets is located adjacent to, or in, the meat department.
powwow (POW WOW) n.
1. any conference or gathering; 2. among Native North Americans, a ceremony to help cure disease, plan war, etc. characterized by feasting and dancing; a medicine man; a conference —vi. to hold a conference; confer
• Powwows once conjured up visions of Native Americans and pilgrims smoking a peace pipe in a circle around the fire. • Any corporate meeting can be refered to as a powwow, especially if it is an informal one.
practical (PRAK ti KL) adj.
1. gotten by or from practice; 2. usable, workable; sensible; 3. dealing with reality rather than theory; practicable
• A practical knowledge of how a car engine works is a good thing to have before attempting to repair one. • When making home repairs, the rule is to be practical about what you can afford to do. • It is not practical to equip an economy car with a V-8 engine.
[-ly adv., -ity n.]
pragmatic (prag MAT ik) adj.
1. concerned with everyday practices rather than theory or idealism; practical; 2. opinionated; dogmatic
• A pragmatic approach to learning these words means you should study one or two groups of words in one sitting. • It is not pragmatic to try to read through this book in a single sitting; after all, it doesn’t have much of a plot. • An old codger might be quite pragmatic in his beliefs about how to make a pot of coffee.
[pragmatist* n., -ally adv.]
praise (PRAYZ) vt.
1. to express approval; commend; 2. to glorify; extol
• It is a policy of good management to praise employees for good work. • Praising will almost always get better results than criticizing. • Some congregations exult in praising the Lord.
[-d, praising, -e n. sing.] [Syn. laud, acclaim
preamble (PREE AM bl or pre AM bl) n.
an introduction, especially to a constitution, law, etc. stating what its purpose is
• The preamble to the U.S. Constitution sets down its reason for being. • Wilson’s 14 points were his preamble to laying out his vision of what the peace treaty ending World War I should look like.
[Syn. introduction]
precarious (pri KAYR ee is) adj.
1. uncertain; insecure; dependent on circumstances; 2. depending on the will or favor of others; 3. depending on chance; risky; uncertain
• Sitting on a flagpole is a precarious position to be in. • One who relies on the goodwill of others has at best a precarious chance of success. • Relying on a lottery to raise the money for your college tuition makes the likelihood of your getting a diploma precarious at best.
[-ly* adv.
precedence (PRE si DENS) n.
1. priority because of superiority in rank, age, seniority, etc.; 2. a ranking of dignitaries in order of importance
• In the succession to the presidency, following the Speaker of the House and the President Pro Tempore of the Senate, the precedence is to go through the cabinet secretaries in the order in which their posts were created. • When seating dignitaries at an event, a prince always takes precedence over an earl. • In poker, a royal flush takes precedence over every other hand.
[precedency n.
precedent (PRE si DINT) n.
1. an earlier decision, judgment, act of law, case, etc. that serves as an example for a later one; 2. something done based on earlier events —adj. that precedes; preceding
• The right of the Supreme Court to pass on a law’s constitutionality was established by precedent. • Many court decisions are based on precedent. • It is chivalrous to give women and children precedent over men when abandoning ship.
precept (PREE sept) n.
1. a rule of moral conduct; maxim; 2. a commandment or directive meant as a rule of conduct
• Justice for all is a precept of American democracy. • Not watching while a sausage is being made is a precept of enjoying eating that sausage.
[Syn. doctrine] precipitate* (pri SIP it AYT) vt. 1. to cause to happen before expected or desired; to hasten; 2. (chemistry) to make something insoluble so that it separates from a solution —n. (chemistry) a solid separated from a solution • The invasion of Poland precipitated England’s entry into World War II. • It took a weight gain of 10 pounds to precipitate Melissa’s going on a diet. • Sodium chloride can be precipitated out of solution by adding the right chemical, but don’t ask me which. • Silver chloride coming out of solution appears as grayish flakes of precipitate. [-d, precipitating, precipitation n.]
precise (pri CYS) adj.
1. accurately said; exactly defined; 2. speaking distinctly; 3. without variation; 4. scrupulous; fastidious
• Be precise in what you say, and your words won’t be misinterpreted. • The opposite of precise speaking is mumbling. • An atomic clock is more precise than anybody has a practical use for. • A surgeon must be precise in her attention to keeping a sterile field.
[-ly adv., precision n.] [Syn. explicit, correct] preclude* (pree KLOOD) vt. to make impossible; to cut out of the realm of possibilities; to prevent • Having been scratched from the field of 12 horses in the race precludes any possibility of How About That’s finishing in the money. • The drawbridge’s being stuck open precluded any chance of Iggy’s getting to work early yesterday. [-d, precluding] [Syn. prevent
precocious (pri KOH shis) adj.
1. matured to a level beyond that which is normal for one of that age (a precocious child); 2. of or demonstrating premature development
• Geoffrey was so precocious that he was walking at 8 months of age. • Mathew was precocious enough to be taking college-level math courses while still in junior high school. • Mozart’s precocious musical skill is well documented.
[-ly adv.] predators* (PRED uh TAWRZ) n. 1. ones who live by exploiting and robbing others; 2. ones who capture and feed on other animals; 3. birds or creatures of prey • Predators often take advantage of older or disadvantaged people. • Lions, like most predators, are at the top of their food chain. • Predators of the bird family are known as raptors.
predecessor (PRE di CES oer) n.
1. a person who held the same office before the one currently occupying it; 2. an ancestor; 3. something that was used before it was replaced by a newer thing
• Lyndon Johnson’s predecessor as president was John F. Kennedy. • Cro-Magnon man is believed to have been a predecessor of Homo sapiens. • The ice box, which contained a block of ice, was the predecessor of the refrigerator.
predict (pri DIKT) vt.
foretell; to know and state what a future event will be
• If fortune tellers can predict the future, why aren’t they all rich? • It is easy to predict that the next word you look at after predict will be prehensile.
[-able* adj., -ably adv.]
prehensile (pree HEN sil) adj.
adapted for grabbing, such as the tails of many monkeys; grasping
• If you’ve ever gone to the monkey house, then you’ve seen monkeys swinging by their prehensile tails. • Unlike most humans, monkeys and lemurs have prehensile feet and can use them to pick things up. premise* (PREM is) n. a prior statement or condition that serves as the basis for an argument or procedure; the underlying assumption • The premise of your asking whether I enjoyed the movie Gladiator is in error because I never saw the film. • When Dawn asked Cathy how she’d enjoyed college chemistry, her premise was that Cathy had taken the course, and she was correct.
[Syn. presumption
preoccupy (pree AHK yoo py) vt.
to occupy one’s thoughts to the total exclusion of everything else; to engross or absorb
• Sandy was so preoccupied with the book she was reading that she didn’t hear her mother call her to dinner. • It was the job of the point man to preoccupy the sentry so that he didn’t see the rest of the attacking force.
[preoccupied, -ing, preoccupation* n.]
prepossess (pree PUH zes) vt.
1. to prejudice or bias, especially favorably; 2. to favorably impress immediately
• Linda loved to prepossess a new teacher by showing off her good manners at every opportunity. • Prepossessing one’s new employer is not a bad way to start a new business relationship.
[-ed, -ing, prepossessing, adj.]
prescribe (pri SKRYB) vt.
1. to order or direct; ordain; 2. to order as a medicine or method of treatment (by a medical doctor); 3. (law) to outlaw or invalidate
• The traffic officer prescribed a left turn for all traffic at the intersection. • The doctor prescribed a regimen of bed rest and a liquid diet. • The Constitution prescribes cruel and unusual punishment.
[-d, prescribing
preservation (PREZ ir VAY shin) n.
1. protected from harm; 2. kept from spoiling or rotting; 3. maintaining by regulating
• Acid-free sleeves help with the preservation of photographs. • Food preservation began with vacuum packaging in the nineteenth century. • The preservation of wildlife is just one assignment of the U.S. Forest Service.
presumptuous (pri ZUMP shoo uhs) adj.
overconfident or arrogant; taking too much for granted
• How presumptuous was the guest at the cocktail party to take a plastic bag from her purse and start filling it with jumbo cocktail shrimp? • It was rather presumptuous of the wedding guest to take a seat at the head table.
[-ly adv., -ness n.]
pretense (PREE tens) n.
1. an unsupported claim of having accomplished something; 2. a false claim; 3. a pretending, as in make-believe
• It was quite by accident that a former vice president made a pretense to having invented the Internet. • A major pretense of a certain U.S. president is that he can pronounce the word “nuclear.” • Children often learn proper behavior through pretense to be adult role models.
pretentious (pree TEN shis) adj.
1. claiming some importance or distinction; 2. ostentatious; showing off; self-important
• George of the Jungle was a rather pretentious character, considering that Ape was the brains of the outfit. • The triple loop performed by the roller boarder was a very pretentious display of his/her skills.
previous (PREE vee uhs) adj.
before the present; prior; at an earlier time; preceding
• The previous administration enjoyed more popularity than the current one. • Mary was convinced that she had been a sheep in a previous incarnation.
primarily (pry MER i lee) adv.
at first; originally; principally; mainly
• Primarily, vacations seemed more important than school to Ian, but that came to change. • Alice went to space camp primarily to learn more about the solar system.
primary (PRY mer ee) adj.
1. first in order or first to have been developed; 2. primitive; fundamental; basic; 3. in the first level of a series or sequence; 4. chief; principal; main
• The primary polio vaccine was the Salk vaccine, with Sabin’s coming along later. • Primary school is where a child develops fundamental reading and math skills. • In the primary elections, the final candidates are selected. • The president is the primary executive officer in the United States
primate (PRY mayt) n.
1. any of an order of mammals that has soft hands and feet, each terminating in five digits (monkeys, lemurs, apes, humans); 2. the highest-ranking bishop in a province
• Orangutans and gorillas are very different primates from your sister Sally. • A primate of the church is so called because he is prime among officials of his region.
principle (PRIN si pil) n.
1. a fundamental truth or natural law; 2. the ultimate or underlying cause of something; 3. a rule of conduct or scientific law
• It is a principle of Newton’s physical discoveries that what goes up must come down. • The principle of jet propulsion might not be obvious from watching a jet plane, but watch a squid propel itself through the water, and you’ll get it. • The principles of good manners are not hard to live by and make for a much more civilized existence.pristine* (pris TEEN) adj. 1. characteristic of an earlier time or condition; original; 2. as if unopened; unspoiled; still pure • The pristine conditions of the Alaskan forests exist only because humans have interfered with them minimally. • Pristine mountain streams barely exist in the lower 48 states, primarily due to urban and industrial sprawl.
[-ly adv.
procrastinate (proh CRAS tin AYT) vi.
to put off doing something to a future time and to do this habitually; to often postpone
• When it comes to doing homework, the better students are generally not the ones who procrastinate. • The motto of the true procrastinator (one who procrastinates) is “Never do today what you can put off ’til tomorrow.”
[-d, procrastinating]
procure (proh KYUR mint) vt.
to get or bring about by some effort; obtain; secure
• It was the sergeant’s job to procure supplies. • We must procure the right tools for doing the job.
[-d, procuring, -ment* n.] [Syn. get]
profundity (pruh FUHN di tee) n.
1. of great depth, especially intellectually; 2. a profound matter, idea, etc.
• Some people find great profundity in the works of Salvadore Dali; others just find them funny or clever. • The works of Gilbert and Sullivan are generally lacking in profundity, yet they are very entertaining. • Do not underestimate the profundity of needing to solve the problem of global warming.
profusion (PRUH FYOO zhin) n.
1. a pouring forth with great abundance; 2. great liberalness and wastefulness; 3. a rich or lavish amount
• Strawberries, which are scarce throughout the winter, are available in profusion come spring. • Every Congress passes a profusion of bills that waste taxpayers’ money on local projects. • Wild blackberries and black raspberries may be found growing in great profusion by roadsides throughout the Northeast every summer.
prolific (pruh LIF ik) adj.
1. producing an abundance of fruit or offspring; 2. producing many works of the mind (writings, musical compositions, art, etc.)
• Some breeds of cat are very prolific, having litters of six to eight kittens at a time. • Franz Joseph Haydn was prolific enough to produce over 150 symphonies during his lifetime, 104 of which still exist in today’s repertoire, although only the last 16 are performed frequently. • Shakespeare has to have been one of the most prolific playwrights of the seventeenth century.
[-ally adv.] [Syn. fertile]
protagonist (pruh TAG uhn ist) n.
1. the main character in a story, play, drama, etc. around whom the action takes place; 2. the actor who plays that role
• Sam Spade, the protagonist created by Dashiell Hammett, first appeared in 1929 and made it big in The Maltese Falcon. • Spade appeared in a few films, with Humphrey Bogart as the protagonist, and when the Hammett stories were exhausted, Bogart continued as Raymond Chandler’s Philip Marlowe.provocative* (pruh VAHK uh tiv) adj. 1. provoking or tending to provoke to action, thought, feeling, etc.; stimulating; 2. erotic • Samuel Adams’s impassioned writings against the arbitrary actions of the British monarchy were provocative enough to be credited with moving the colonists toward revolution. • The actress wore a very provocative gown to the award ceremony.
[-ly adv.]
proximity (prahk SIM i tee) adj.
the state or property of being near in space or time
• The proximity of the Easter and Passover holidays is not a coincidence because the Last Supper was a Passover Seder. • When driving, it is a good idea to stay out of proximity to the car in front of you.
pseudonym (SOO din im) n.
a false name, especially one assumed by an author so as not to be identified by his readers; pen name
• Mark Twain was the well-known pseudonym of Samuel Langhorne Clemens. • The creator of Perry Mason, Erle Stanley Gardner, wrote other books under the pseudonym A. A. Fair. • The French call a pseudonym a nom de plume or pen name.
quandary (KWAHN dree) n.
a state of uncertainty; a puzzling position or a perplexing situation; a predicament
• Sylvia was in a quandary over which dress to wear to her friend Rhiannon’s party. • The quandary of whether to accept his friend Randy’s invitation to go to the hockey game, or to go to the basketball game with his dad, as previously planned, reduced Howard to tears.
[Syn. predicament]
quell (KWELL) vt.
1. to crush; to put an end to; to subdue; 2. to allay or assuage; to quiet
• It was General Santa Ana’s job to quell the rebellion of the Texans. • Bill tried to quell Andrea’s fears about her upcoming tonsilectomy. • It should quell your concerns about spelling q words to know that there’s always a u following the q—as long as it’s an English word.
querulous (KWER yoo lis) adj.
complaining; peevish; inclined to find fault
• Nancy was so querulous that no hairstylist wanted to wait on her. • The gardener finished trimming the roses and was waiting for the querulous Mr. Jones to inspect his work, knowing that the latter would find something wrong.
[-ly adv.]
quest (KWEST) n.
1. a pursuit; 2. any journey or search in pursuit of a (usually) noble end
• Sir Galahad’s quest to find the Holy Grail is legendary. • Frank traveled from ballpark to ballpark around the country in his quest to find the perfect frankfurter
quizzical (KWIZ i kuhl) adj.
1. comical; odd; 2. teasing; bantering; 3. perplexing
• The cat had a seemingly quizzical expression on its face after it fell off the couch. • Barry chided Tony about his batting slump in a quizzical manner. • Hailee felt that trying to figure out how this gravity thing worked was rather quizzical.
[-ly adv.]radicalism* (RAD i kil IZ im) n. 1. the quality or state of being extreme, especially in political matters; 2. extreme in principles, ideas, methods, etc. • Senator Brown’s penchant for radicalism brought him the admiration of his friends and the distrust of his enemies. • The surgeon’s reputation for radicalism made his patients think twice before assenting to go under the knife.
rancorously (RAN kir uhs lee) adv.
maliciously; spitefully; with continuous bitter ill will or hatred
• The argument continued rancorously as each side showed its contempt for the other. • Peter treated double-parkers rancorously by letting the air out of their tires.
[rancorous adj.]
raucous (RAW kuhs) adj.
1. hoarse; rough sounding; 2. loud and bawdy
• The revelers had a raucous good time as they partied the night away. • Gerald had a raucous laugh that reminded the average bystander of how a grizzly bear might laugh.
[-ly adv., -ness n.] reaction* (ree AK shin) n. 1. an opposing action or force; 2. a response to a stimulus; 3. a moving backward to an earlier time’s condition or way of doing things; extreme conservatism • Newton’s third law of motion states that for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. • When suddenly poked, it is a natural reaction to jump. • The forces of reaction would move the country back to horse-and-buggy times.
reactionary (ree AK shin ER ee) adj.
characteristic of or advocating definition 3 of reaction —n. one who advocates same
• Reactionary forces wish to return the country’s economy to the gold standard. • The political opposite of a radical is a reactionary.
[reactionaries pl.]
rebellious (ri BEL yis) adj.
1. resisting authority; engaged in armed resistance against the government; 2. of or like rebels; 3. opposing all control; defiant; 4. difficult to treat
• There is usually one rebellious group or another trying to overthrow a government in Central America. • Teenagers frequently become rebellious against parental authority around age 17. • Dan struggled with a very rebellious cowlick of hair.
[-ly adv., -ness n.
rebuff (ri BUF) vt.
1. to snub; bluntly reject; 2. to check or turn back (an advance) —n. a snubbing; an abrupt refusal of advice, help, etc.
• Management’s offer of a 2% raise was rebuffed by the union’s representatives. • Marilyn rebuffed Joe’s attempt to get back together. • Liz’s attempt to get the floor refinishers back to fix the flaws in their work was met with a rebuff.
[-ed, -ing]
recklessness (REK lis NIS) n.
1. foolhardiness; carelessness; 2. rashness; disregard for consequences
• Paul’s mom was nervous about his going skiing—especially because he had a history of recklessness. • What appears to be recklessness on the part of professional daredevils has usually been very carefully planned out so as to avoid injury.
[reckless adj., recklessly adv.]
reconcile (REK in SYL) vt.
1. make consistent; 2. become friendly again; 3. to settle
• At least once a month, everyone should reconcile his or her checkbook to make sure that what is in the account jibes with what the book shows. • Jan and Mary reconciled their differences over who should have brought the watermelon to the picnic. • The divorced couple reconciled for the sake of the children.
[-d*, reconciling, reconciliation n.
reconnoiter (REE kin OY tir) vt.
1. to make a reconnaisance, that is, to seek out information about enemy installations or positions; 2. to make a preliminary survey
• Corporal Smith was sent ahead to reconnoiter the lay of the land and look for enemy troops. • The surveyor was sent to the prospective shopping center to reconnoiter the property and the existing traffic patterns and to assess the practicality of the project.
[-ed, -ing]
recrimination (ree KRIM in AY shin) n.
the answering of an accusation by accusing the accuser; countercharge
• When Sue threatened to take Jim to court over his dog’s digging up her roses, he threatened recrimination over her cat’s destroying his vegetable garden. • Barbara threatened recrimination if Barry complained to the authorities about her noisy party.
[(to) recriminate vi.]
rectify (REK ti FY) vt.
1. to set right; correct; 2. (electricity) to convert alternating current to direct current
• Roberta tried to rectify the error that she had made when she omitted Jack’s name from the guest list. • Mr. Jones rectified the boundary dispute with his neighbor by moving his fence.
[rectified, -ing]
redoubtable (ree DOWT ib il) adj.
1. formidable; fearsome; 2. commanding respect
• Atilla the Hun’s horsemen constituted a redoubtable force. • Heavy machinery is redoubtable, and one working with it must exercise care at all times.
reductive (ree DUHK tiv) adj.
1. of or characterized by making smaller or lowering in price; 2. tending to making things less complex (usually a disparaging term)
• Certain stores price items so that they may advertise reductive pricing schemes. • Good science teachers take a reductive approach to the subject matter so that they can feed the concepts to the students in bite-sized portions.
[-ly adv.] redundancy* (ree DUHN din see) n. 1. the quality of being excessive; superfluity; 2. an overabundance; 3. something that says something already said or does something already done; 4. the part of a redundant statement that is superfluous • To say that the dirty laundry is not very clean is a redundancy. • Due to a redundancy of grain produced most years by U.S. farmers, some of them are paid by the government not to grow certain crops. • Many commercial airliners have redundancies deliberately built into them to back up the main systems. • “Is not very clean” is the redundancy in the first sentence. [redundancies pl., redundance n.
refract (rif RAKT) vt.
1. to cause a ray of light to bend, as it does when passing obliquely from one medium to another of different density; 2. to measure the degree of bending of a ray of light
• When white light refracts through a triangular prism, it separates into the colors of the rainbow. • An ophthalmologist or optometrist refracts one’s eyes to determine the proper curvature for corrective lenses.
[-ed, -ing, -ion, n.]
refute (rif YOOT) vt.
1. to prove to be wrong; 2. to prove incorrect by argument or evidence
• Mr. Brown’s fingerprints and gloves, found at the scene of the crime, refute his contention that he was never there. • It is the defense attorney’s job to refute the prosecutor’s case so that the defendant will be found not guilty.
[-d, refuting, refutable adj., refutably adv.] [Syn. disprove]
regale (ri GAYL) vt.
1. to entertain with a great feast; 2. to delight with something enjoyable or amusing
• The opulent party thrower regaled his guests with champagne, caviar, and truffled pâté. • The audience at the Mayfair Theater last night was regaled by a confection of music and dance.
[-d, regaling]
regurgitate (ri GOER ji TAYT) vt.
1. to cause to flow backward, notably from the stomach to the mouth; 2. to give back information that has been only partially digested
• Those who go to a party with an upset stomach are likely to regurgitate any and all refreshments they partake of. • Some teachers ask their students to regurgitate what they have learned on exams rather than to apply the knowledge in a meaningful way.
[-d, regurgitating, regurgitation n.] [Syn. vomit]
reiterate (ree IT er AYT) vt.
to say or do again or repeatedly
• If your mother has told you once, she’s reiterated it 1,000 times: Keep your elbows off the table! • Those who have not learned the lessons of history are doomed to reiterate them.
[-d, reiterating] [Syn. repeat]
relapse (ree LAPS) vt.
to slip or fall back into a former condition, disease, or bad habit, especially after improvement —n. the act of having a relapse or a recurrence
• After years of successfully fighting her compulsion to gamble, Norma relapsed at the Kentucky Derby. • Just as Carlos seemed ready to be released from intensive care, he suffered a relapse.
[-d, relapsing
relinquish (ri LIN kwish) vt.
1. to abandon (a claim); 2. to surrender (something); 3. to give up
• Carla relinquished all claim to part ownership of Ira’s cat. • By the Treaty of Torsedilla, Spain relinquished all claims on Brazil to Portugal. • Mike relinquished his sidearm to the palace guard.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. abandon, waive, forego]
reluctant (ri LUHK tint) adj.
1. unwilling or opposed to participating in; disinclined; 2. marked by unwillingness
• The defendant in most trials is usually a reluctant participant. • Mark seemed reluctant to accept Abbie’s excuse for not being able to go bowling on Thursday night.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. loath, unwilling]
remiss (ri MISS) adj.
1. negligent in; careless about; lax; 2. marked by carelessness or negligence
• Don’t be remiss in paying your income taxes on time. • The yard clearly showed that the house’s last owner had been remiss in performing lawn maintenance.
[Syn. negligent, neglectful, lax]
remnant (REM nint) n.
1. what is left over; remainder; 2. a small remaining part or quantity; 3. last trace; 4. a piece of cloth or carpet left at the end of a roll
• Only a small remnant of the turkey remained after the feasters at Bob and Barbara’s were finished with it.• The ice-cream cake disappeared without leaving a remnant behind. • Carpet remnants are usually very good buys and, in some cases, can be room size.
[Syn. scrap, remainder]
remuneration (ri MYOO noer AY shin) n.
1. the act of paying for work done; 2. reward; payment; compensation
• A painter usually expects remuneration when his job is completed. • Remuneration should be appropriate to the nature of the job performed.
[Syn. payment]
render (REN dir) vt.
1. to deliver, present, or submit for payment (for example, a bill); 2. to give in return; 3. to pay something due or owed; 4. to represent or depict
• The painter will render the bill to his customer upon completing the job. • The Lone Ranger renders good in response to evil. • Ralph rendered Phyllis thanks for a job well done. • The architect rendered a drawing of the new kitchen.
[-ed*, -ing]
renovate (REN uh VAYT) vt.
1. to make sound again; to clean up and make like new; 2. to revive; refresh
• Jason enjoyed renovating homes so much that he gave up his teaching job to do it full-time. • When you renovate your kitchen, you can expect to improvise and put up with inconveniences until the job is done. • Wallie felt renovated after her plunge in the ocean.
[-d, renovating] [Syn. renew]
renunciation (ri NUHN see AY shin) n.
1. the act of formally giving up, often at the cost of a right, claim, title, etc.; 2. a formal declaration of the foregoing
• His renunciation of all claims to the motorcycle came only after receiving a fair amount in compensation. • The applicant signed the renunciation of rights to the deed to the house until the mortgage had been paid off.
[Syn. disclaimer]
repentance (re PEN tins) n.
a feeling of sorrow or self-reproach for what one has done or has not done
• Ralph had a deep feeling of repentance for not having gotten to know his father better. • Absolution by repentance for indiscretions and sins is one of the attractive qualities of the Catholic Church.
[Syn. penitence]
reprehensible (REP ri HEN si bl) adj.
deserving reprimand or rebuke; fault filled; awful
• The judge told the hit-and-run driver that his behavior had been reprehensible. • Reprehensible behavior is not permissible under any circumstances—even if you can get away with it.
[reprehensibly adv.]repudiate* (ri PYOO dee AYT) vt. 1. refuse to have anything to do with; disown; 2. to deny the validity or authority of (a charge, a belief, etc.); 3. to refuse to acknowledge (a government) • Fran repudiated any responsibility for the behavior of her ex-husband. • The ancient Romans typically did not repudiate the religious beliefs of their captured subjects, as long as the subjects continued to pay taxes to Rome. • It is typical of war criminals to repudiate the power of the courts that are trying them. [-d, repudiating] resentment* (ri ZENT mint) n. feelings of displeasure from having been ignored, snubbed, offended, or injured • Tom made no attempt to hide his resentment of the fact that Mom always liked Dick best. • A certain former president, who shall go nameless, tried to hide his resentment that the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences never honored him for his movie work. [Syn. offense
resolute (REZ i loot) adj.
having or showing a firm resolve; determined; purposeful; unwavering
• We must stay resolute in our refusal to give in to terrorists. • Elaine was resolute in her plan to climb Mount Everest.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. faithful
resolution (rez i LOO shin) n.
1. the act or process of breaking something up into its constituent parts; 2. a determining or deciding; 3. the thing determined or decided; 4. a formal statement or opinion adopted by a group; 5. a solution or answering of a question or problem
• A digital picture’s resolution often depends on how many pixels it is made up of. • The two parties worked toward the resolution of their difficulties. • The resolution to the dispute was to split the baby into two equal parts. (Hmm, where have I heard that before?) • The General Assembly’s resolution passed by a unanimous vote. • To find the resolution to a complex math problem, you should first separate the problem into its parts and then solve each of those. resplendent* (ris PLEN dint) adj. brightly shining; dazzling; splendid • She was resplendent, bedecked in her finest jewelry. • The ship was resplendent in the morning sun as she made ready to sail to the Caribbean.
[-ly adv., resplendence n.]
responsibility (ris PAHN si BIL i tee) n.
1. condition or quality of being accountable for something’s happening; accountability, dependability, obliged, etc.; 2. a thing or person that one holds accountability for
• The responsibility for anything that happens on this ship is the captain’s alone. • On a field trip, the teacher takes responsibility for all the students’ well-being. • The children are the babysitter’s responsibility.
restraint (ris TRAYNT) n.
1. a holding back or being held back; 2. an influence or action that holds something back; 3. a limitation of liberty; 4. emotional control; impulse control; reserve; constraint
• The patient is confined to her bed by Velcro restraints. • Sometimes we need to use restraint to keep from eating that extra dessert treat. • The Constitution of the United States permits no restraint of freedom of speech, which doesn’t mean that it doesn’t happen. • Restraint, like everything else, should be exercised in moderation. retain* (ree TAYN) vt. 1. to keep; maintain possession of; 2. to continue to have or to hold in; 3. to keep in mind; 4. to hire (as a lawyer) • One needs to make the monthly mortgage payments to retain ownership of a house. • Walt Disney retained his stock in the company long after he had ceased running it. • It is not easy for all people to retain facts in their minds. • If you intend to pursue your interest in this matter, it might be advisable for you to retain an attorney.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. keep
retroactive (RET roh AK tiv) adj.
1. affecting things that took place earlier; 2. going into effect at a specified date in the past
• Despite the Constitution’s prohibiting ex post facto laws, many tax laws are retroactive. • The congressional budget is always retroactive to the beginning of the current fiscal year, even though it is usually approved well after that date.
[-ly adv.]
retrospective (RET roh SPEK tiv) adj.
1. looking back on or toward the past; 2. applying to the past; retroactive —n. an exhibition of the lifetime work of a person (usually one in the arts); a compendium of one’s life’s work
• It is often fun to take a retrospective look at one’s early years. • Beethoven’s work, in retrospective, changed classical music for all time. • The museum is having a retrospective on the works of Picasso next month.
[-ly adv.]
reveler (REV il oer) n.
1. one who is noisily partying; 2. one delighting in one’s freedom; 3. a merrymaker
• Most college students become revelers at one time or another. • Some college students are revelers for four years; then they spend the rest of their lives wondering why they did that. • A reveler should always have a designated driver preselected.
[revel vi., revelry, reveller n.
reverence (REV ir ins) n.
1. a feeling of respect, love, and awe (as for something sacred or venerated); 2. a gesture of respect to indicate same; 3. the state of being regarded with deep respect
• Clergymen are often held by their flock in reverence. • Reverence is usually the proper attitude to assume during religious services and preparing for SAT exams.• Great reverence permeates the state funeral of a former U.S. president.
[Syn. honor, awe]
revulsion (riv UHL shin) n.
extreme shock, disgust, or repugnance; a feeling of great loathing
• Revulsion swept through the world at the untimely demise of President Kennedy. • To avoid causing your revulsion, we aver that no animals were harmed in the making of this book.
[Syn. aversion]
rhetoric (RET oer ik) n.
1. the art or skill of using words effectively in speaking or writing; 2. language that is showy or elaborate, but lacking in clarity or originality of ideas or emotions; phony eloquence
• Former President Reagan was extremely good at connecting with the public through use of rhetoric. • Political conventions are always filled with rhetoric for the party faithful but unrelated to the real world.
ridicule (RID ik yool) vt.
the act of making someone or something the object of scorn; to mock; to poke fun at
• Certain political leaders are easier than others to ridicule by drawing caricatures of them. • Political cartoonists are specialists in the art of ridicule.
[-d, ridiculing] [Syn. deride, mock, taunt]
rite (RYT) n.
1. a formal ceremony or act associated with a relegious procedure or observance; 2. any customary formal observance, procedure, or practice
• Almost every religion has some sort of rite of passage from childhood into adulthood. • Stravinsky celebrated the pagan rite of spring in his tone poem of the same name.
[Syn. ceremony] romantic* (roh MAN tik) adj. 1. having the nature of or characterized by romance (idealized imagined love and adventure stories); 2. without factual basis; 3. not practical; guided by emotion rather than thought —n. a romantic person; romantic literature or music from the Romantic Movement (early to mid-nineteenth century) • The Arthurian legend is a romantic story of the love triangle between Arthur, Guinevere, and Lancelot. • Many girls have a romantic notion about being carried away by Prince Charming to live happily ever after. • Karl Marx’s notion of a society where each person does what he can and receives what he needs was a romantic one. • Beethoven’s later works ushered in the Romantic Movement in music. [-ally adv.]
ruffian (RUHF ee in) n.
a hoodlum; a violent, lawless, brutal person; a tough guy
• Allen’s mom did not want him hanging out with ruffians after school. • Ruffians are often the bane of an otherwise nice neighborhood
rural (RUR il) adj.
1. not urban or suburban; of the countryside; 2. living in the country; 3. having to do with farming
• Rural America is where you’ll find the cows grazing. • Grant Wood’s American Gothic depicts an imaginary, typical, rural couple (who have no relation to a real one). • A plow and a tractor are necessities of rural living.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. bucolic, pastoral, rustic
sacrosanctity (SAK ri SANKTt i tee) n.
something very sacred; holiness; inviolability
• The Catholic Church insists on the sacrosanctity of the marriage vows. • To Muslims, the sacrosanctity of the Dome of the Rock must not be violated by nonbelievers.
sagacious (suh GAY shis) adj.
wise; showing keen perception and sound judgment
• A sagacious person limits the amount of money he brings to the tables in a casino. • One who drinks alcoholic beverages and then drives is not sagacious.
[sagaciously adv.] [Syn. shrewd]
salvage (SAL vij) vt.
to save or rescue from a shipwreck, or fire, flood, etc.; to engage in the saving of goods or wrecked ships —n. anything so rescued, especially the refloating of lost ships for historical purpose or for monetary compensation, or the recovery of goods from wreckages
• Ken was able to salvage few household goods after the tornado had gone. • Some divers make a living from salvaging valuables from shipwrecks. • The sunken hulks of lost ships are sometimes raised and sold for their salvage value.
[-d, salvaging] [Syn. save, rescue]
sanctimonious (SANK ti MOH nee is) adj.
pretending to be very holy or pious; feigning righteousness
• A sanctimonious person is one with a “holier-than-thou” attitude. • Fred Flanders was extremely sanctimonious, until he was caught one day with his hand in the cookie jar.
[sanctimoniously adv.] [Syn. devout]
sanction (SANK shin) vt.
1. authorized approval or empowerment from an authoritative agent or agency; 2. support, encouragement; 3. a coercive measure taken by a group (like a boycott) to bring someone or something into line
• State governments sanction marriages within their borders. • Sue sanctioned her daughter’s going after her employer in court for failing to pay her in full for her services. • The United States has imposed economic sanctions on Cuba since the early 1960s.
[sanctioned*, -ing]
sarcastic (sahr KAS tik) adj.
1. a taunting remark that has the nature of being caustic, cutting, and/or ironic (usually with the intent to hurt); 2. one who uses such remarks (sarcastic usually implies the intent to hurt)
• When Alice told Phil that his new Mohawk haircut looked awesome, she was being sarcastic; she meant awful. • A sarcastic remark often means the opposite of what is said, like irony.
[sarcastically adv.
satire (SAT ah yir) n.
a literary work, or works, that uses sarcasm, irony, etc. to expose and attack or deride vices, foibles, etc.
• The earliest known satires are the plays of Aristophanes. • In the guise of a travelogue, Gulliver’s Travels is one of the most famous satires of the nineteenth century. • Mark Twain was especially adept at satire, as was Oscar Wilde.
[satiric adj., satirically adv.] [Syn. caricature, wit]
scalpel (SKAL pil) n.
a small, light knife with a very sharp blade used by surgeons and for dissections
• A scalpel was the only way of making surgical incisions before the arrival of the surgical laser. • Going in for an operation is often referred to as “going under the scalpel.”
scapegoat (SKAYP goht) n.
a person, place, or thing upon which the crimes or misdeeds of others are blamed
• Being a scapegoat has a long tradition in history, beginning with an ancient king who kept a goat around to take the blame for everything. • Killing the messenger who brought the bad news continued the tradition of using a scapegoat.
scholar (SKAH lir) n.
1. a learned person; 2. the recipient of scholarship assistance; 3. any pupil
• A scholar used to refer exclusively to a learned person, or one learned in a particular field, such as a biblical scholar or an art scholar. • Former President Bill Clinton was a Rhodes Scholar, which means, in essence, that he was paid to study at Oxford. • My youngest scholar just finished kindergarten.
[Syn. pupil]
scientific (SY in TIF ik) adj.
1. of or pertaining to science; 2. based on the principles of science, rather than superstition or conjecture; 3. proven methods
• It is a scientific fact that gravity pulls everything toward the center of the earth. • Many scientific principles were discovered and/or stated by Sir Isaac Newton. • Before a medicine is approved by the FDA for public use, it must be scientifically proven to be more helpful than it is harmful.
[scientifically adv.]
scientist (SY in TIST) n.
a specialist whose profession is one of the physical, earth, or life sciences (that is, biology, geology, astronomy, chemistry, and physics)
• A physician who specializes in research is a scientist. • Social scientists, such as sociologists and psychologists, are not considered true scientists by the scientific establishment.• Scientists divide their numbers into life scientists (botanists and zoologists), physical scientists (chemists and physicists), and earth/space scientists (geologists, meteorologists, and astronomers).
scrutinize (SKROOT in YZ) vt.
to look at very carefully; examine closely
• If a deal sounds too good to be true, scrutinize it because almost invariably it will prove to be so. • A jeweler uses a loupe to scrutinize diamonds and other gemstones.
[-d, scrutinizing] [Syn. examine, inspect]
sculpture (SKUHLP chir) n.
1. the art of carving wood, chiseling stone, molding metal or clay, etc. into three-dimensional figures, statues, etc.; 2. any figure so made or collection of same —vt. 1. to cut, carve, mold, chisel, etc. into figures, statuary, etc.; 2. to change a form by erosion
• Sculptures can be as small as cameos that women wear as jewelry or as large as the presidential faces that adorn Mount Rushmore. • Rodin’s “The Thinker” is one of the best-known sculptures of nineteenthcentury Europe. • Michelangelo preferred to sculpture in marble and insisted that the statue had always been in the marble; he had just removed the excess stone. • The forces of wind and water have served to sculpture the thousands of natural sculptures that adorn Utah’s Bryce Canyon National Park.
[-d, sculpturing, sculptural adj., sculpturally adv.] s
ance (SAY ahns) n.
a meeting at which a medium or psychic attempts to communicate with the dead
• Morticia went to séances to attempt to communicate with her dead uncle Fester. • After Morticia’s sixth unsuccessful try at contacting Uncle Fester at a séance, it became clear that he was not going to say “Boo!” to her.
secrecy (SEE kri see) n.
1. the condition of being concealed or secret; 2. the practice of keeping things hushed up
• A veil of secrecy surrounded the building of the first atomic bomb. • The secrecy surrounding the just-referenced Manhattan Project could not approach the secrecy of the formula for Coca-Cola syrup. • The government maintains secrecy of things it does not want the public to know about by categorizing such events as classified
sedative (SED it iv) adj.
soothing or quieting; —n. medicine that soothes nervousness or excitement
• Many find a warm glass of milk is useful at night as a sedative in order to relax before going to bed. • After observing the car accident, Mema needed a sedative to calm her down.
segment (SEG mint) n.
1. a division or section of something; 2. (geometry) a part of a line between two named endpoints, one of which has legs on it.
• Segment BC is the part of a line with endpoints at B and C. • A segment is the shortest distance between two points.
[Syn. part]
selfishness (SEL fish nis) n.
1. a condition of being overly concerned with one’s own well-being to the exclusion of all others; self-centeredness; 2. prompted by self-interest
• Selfishness is the reason for the breakup of most marriages. • Richard demonstrated his selfishness by eating all the strawberries off the top of the strawberry shortcake before anyone had been served
sentence (SENT ins) n.
1. the judgment of a court of law; 2. a group of words that express a complete thought —vt. to pronounce judgment; condemn; pronounce punishment
• The court sentenced the criminal to a 20-year term. • In grammar, a phrase is much like a sentence, except that a phrase does not convey a complete thought. • After a jury has found a person guilty, the judge may sentence that person to anything from probation to death.
[-d, sentencing]
sentiment (SENT i mint) n.
1. a complex combination of opinions and feelings; 2. an emotional attitude; 3. the meaning behind something
• My sentiment tells me that you are a very discriminating person, but I’m usually not a good judge of character. • The retro look of some automobiles popular in the early part of this century is a blatant appeal to the sentiment of cherishing the past. • Gail told Gil that he could stay, but her tone of voice made it clear that her sentiment was far from welcoming.
[Syn. opinion, feeling]
serendipity (SER in DIP it ee) n.
1. an apparent gift for discovering good things by accident; 2. luck or good fortune in accidentally finding something good
• Hershey’s chocolate makers had the serendipity to discover both peanut butter cups and the shape of the Hershey Kiss. • Discovering that alloying copper and tin made the hard metal bronze was a case of serendipity for early man because the two rarely occurred together in nature.
[serendipitous adj., serendipitously adv.]
shun (SHUHN) vt.
deliberately stay away from; scrupulously and consistently avoid
• A recovering alcoholic must shun all contact with alcoholic beverages. • It is a healthy idea for everyone to shun cigarette smoke, both first- and secondhand.
[-ned, -ning]
simplicity (sim PLIS it ee) n.
1. freedom from complexity or intricacy; simple state; simple quality; 2. plainness; lack of elegance or embellishment; 3. foolishness; lacking sense
• Making a kite is simplicity itself and requires only two light sticks, some paper, and some string. • Jane’s wedding dress was elegant by its very simplicity, being just a shiny, white, untooled satin. • Jack demonstrated his simplicity when he said, “Nice kitty,” just prior to sticking his head into the lion’s mouth
simplistic (sim PLIS tik) adj.
taking a complicated situation and making it unrealistically simple; oversimplified
• It is simplistic to believe that a calculus problem can be solved while standing on one foot. • Trying to fix an overheating car engine by adding cold water is taking a simplistic approach—and is also likely to get you burned.
[-ally adv.]
simply (SIM plee) adv.
1. in a simple way; with simplicity; 2. merely; only; just; 3. absolutely; totally
• The dress was made simply, in a short time. • Faith was simply trying to be nice by offering her help. • Will was simply furious with the way he had been treated. sinuate (SIN yoo it for adj., SIN yoo ayt for v.) adj. 1. s-shaped, like a sine curve; sinuous; 2. having an indented, wavy edge, like some leaves —vi. to bend or wind in and out • Some grand-prix automobile race tracks sport sinuate sections, unlike American ovals where cars only turn left. • Some slicing knives have sinuate edges for thinly slicing cold cuts and hard cheeses. • Some of the most dangerous drivers are ones who sinuate through traffic.
[-d, sinuating, -ly, adv.] skeptical* (SKEP ti kl) adj. 1. not easily persuaded or convinced; inclined to doubt; questioning; 2. doubting religious doctrine • In Columbus’s day, learned people were not as skeptical about the earth’s being round as elementary history books would have us believe. • People from Missouri have a reputation for being skeptical; they have to be shown. • Agnostics are generally skeptical about many religious teachings. [-ly adv.]
skepticism (SKEP ti si zm) n.
1. a philosophy that neither truth nor knowledge is attainable by human beings; 2. a doubting attitude, especially pertaining to religious doctrine
• Skepticism as a philosophy began in ancient Greece, where its advocates claimed that man did not have the tools to determine what is and what is not true. • A healthy skepticism is a good thing for those who would prefer not to be flimflammed by pie-in-the-sky advertising claims.
[Syn. uncertainty]
slumber (SLUM bir) vi.
1. to sleep; 2. to be inactive or dormant —n. 1. sleep; 2. a state of inactivity
• Night watchmen have a reputation—some would say undeserved—for slumbering while on the job. • A volcano that has been inactive for recorded history is more safely regarded as in slumber rather than dead. • A pair of pajamas is usually required for a slumber party.• When Mom or Dad is snoring in the armchair, you might call that a moment of slumber.
[-ed, -ing, -er n.]
smugness (SMUG nis) n.
self-satisfaction to an annoying degree; complacency
• Jackie Robinson never showed any smugness for all his accomplishments in major-league baseball. • A good deal of smugness was shown by the mayor of Los Angeles when he lured the Brooklyn Dodgers to the West Coast
society (suh SY it ee) n.
1. a group of persons forming a community with a distinct social or economic connection; 2. the system or condition of living together communally; 3. all people collectively, or a particular strata thereof, usually upper crust
• The society of the Amish living around Lancaster, Pennsylvania, is distinctly different from the society of Chinatown in San Francisco, California. • Those living on a kibbutz in Israel live in a society where every member depends on every other member. • The society we all live in is known as the civilized world. • Those forming the so-called high society live in a world of debutante balls and coming-out parties.
[societies pl., societal, social adj., socially adv.
solace (SAH lis) n.
1. an easing of loneliness, grief, or discomfort; 2. comfort; relief —vt. 1. to comfort; console; 2. to give relief
• Company is always a solace to someone feeling lonely. • One who grieves for a loved one often takes solace in remembering only the good things about the departed. • Volunteers often work to solace those confined to hospital beds.
[Syn. comfort]
solicitude (suh LIS it ood) n.
the state of showing care, concern, etc., sometimes to excess
• Marjorie offered her solicitude for her neighbor, whose son and daughter had both shipped out with their military units. • Marjorie accepted Sally’s solicitude politely, but after Sally left, Marjorie mumbled to herself that she wished everyone would leave her alone so that she could get some rest.
[Syn. care]
solidify (suh LID i fy) vt.
1. to unite or firm up (a relationship); 2. to make a liquid into a solid; firm; compact; harden
• Going to the ballpark together often helps to solidify a relationship between father and son. • A mother-daughter relationship is traditionally solidified by baking cookies. (Eat your heart out, Murphy Brown!) • At 0° Celsius, water solidifies and becomes ice. • Tamping down the gravel helps to solidify the base for a patio.
[solidified, -ing]
soluble (SAHL yoo bil) adj.
1. capable of being dissolved (passed into solution) in water; 2. capable of being solved
• Sugar and salt are both easily soluble, while flour is not. • New York Times crossword puzzles are definitely soluble, although they get harder as the week goes on, and Saturday’s puzzle is a real brainteaser.
[solubly adv.] [Syn. dissolvable, solvable] somber* (SAHM bir) adj. 1. dark and gloomy; dull; 2. melancholy; mentally depressed; 3. grave • When JFK was shot, the mood of the country was very somber. • Veronica was somber, reflecting on how much she missed not having been invited to the senior dance. • A somber air pervaded the landing craft’s occupants as it approached the beach on D-Day. [-ly adv.]
sonnet (SAHN it) n.
a poem, usually 14 lines in length in iambic pentameter, generally on a single theme
• Shakespeare was noted for his sonnets in addition to his dramatic writings. • The sonnets of Petrarch (1304–1374) are among the earliest known. • Both Robert Browning and his future wife, Elizabeth Barrett, wrote sonnets to each other
sophisticated (suh FIS ti KAY tid) adj.
1. urbane, world wise, knowledgeable, as opposed to naïve or simple; 2. very complex and refined
• City folk tend to be more sophisticated than country folk. • The engines that drive a rocket can be very sophisticated; after all, it is rocket science.
[-ly adv., sophistication n.]
spate (SPAYT) n.
an unusually large outpouring, usually one of words
• Fidel Castro’s speeches are often characterized by a spate of words that continue for hours. • When faced with spates, the average audience member is prone to fall asleep.
species (SPEE sheez) n.
1. a distinct kind; variety; class; 2. (biology) a naturally existing population of organisms that can only breed among themselves; 3. the human race
• Tigers, lions, and leopards are three different species of felines. • Dogs and cats belong to two totally different species. • The human species is growing at an alarming rate.
specific (spi SIF ik) adj.
1. specifying a precise, limited thing or group of things, characteristics, etc.; 2. of a particular sort or type
• Last week, Mark lost his timepiece—his wristwatch, to be specific. • Bill knew his appointment was between 6 and 7 P.M., but he was not certain of the specific time. • Fran was looking for a folding umbrella with a very specific checkerboard pattern.
[-ally adv.] [Syn. explicit, special]
specious (SPEE shis) adj.
seeming to be correct, without really being so; plausible, but not actual
• Greg’s conclusion seemed to be logical, but in reality, his thinking was somewhat specious. • It was her neglecting to account for the difference in time zones that made Laura’s calculated arrival time specious.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. plausible
spectacle (SPEK ti kl) n.
1. a strange and/or remarkable sight; 2. a public exhibition on a grand scale —pl. a pair of eyeglasses
• The dog balancing on the beach ball was a spectacle to behold. • The parade of the circus performers and animals from the train station to the arena was a spectacle worth coming out to watch. • Willa bought a new pair of spectacles. speculation* (SPEK yoo LAY shin) n. 1. the act of thinking about; meditation; 2. gambling in stock or land values • Whether or not your parents are going to allow you to go away for the weekend is purely a matter of speculation. • Day traders are engaged in stock price speculation, and more lose money than gain any.
spontaneous (spahn TAY nee uhs) adj.
1. all at once, without advance preparation or premeditation; 2. without apparent outside cause or influence
• Alice’s decision to follow the white rabbit was a spontaneous one. • People used to think that maggots appeared on dead bodies by spontaneous generation. • At the pianist’s first appearance, the audience erupted in spontaneous applause.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. instinctive, impulsive]
spurious (SPYUR ee uhs) adj.
1. false; make-believe; not genuine; 2. similar in appearance, but not in structure
• The note asking Linda’s teacher to excuse her not having her homework turned out to be spurious and was written in Linda’s poorly disguised handwriting.• The bargain diamond ring turned out to be spurious, made not of diamond and gold but of glass and gold plate.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. artificial]
squelch (SKWELCH) vt.
1. to crush or squash by smashing or stamping on; 2. to suppress or silence fully with a demoralizing effect —n. 1. a crushed mass of something; 2. the act of silencing or putting down; 3. the sound made by walking through mud or slush
• Peter tried to squelch the invasion of cockroaches by stomping all over them. • Dictators often try to squelch opposition by making massive reprisals after a slight insurrection. • Suzanne squelched a pile of potatoes for tomorrow morning’s hash browns. • Her boots went “squelch” as she slogged through the mud.
[-ed, -ing, -er n.]
stemming (STEM ing) vt.
1. stopping or checking (especially the flow of a river by damming); 2. closing, plugging, or tamping a hole; 3. removing the stem from a vegetable or piece of fruit
• Damming the river was an attempt at stemming its repeated flooding of the town. • The little Dutch boy’s thumb was stuck into the dike in hopes of stemming the hole’s enlargement by the water eroding it further. • Stemming strawberries before serving them is always a good idea.
stimulant (STIM yoo lint) n.
any drug, medication, experience, sight, etc. that temporarily stimulates or excites some organ or the central nervous system to increase activity
• Many people can’t start the day without a cup of coffee, which acts as a stimulant to get them up and running. • Caffeine, the stimulant in coffee, is also in tea, cola, and other soft drinks.
straddle (STRA dil) vt.
1. to have one’s legs on either side of (a chair, saddle, fence, etc.); 2. to come down on both sides of an issue; to avoid or appear to avoid committing oneself; 3. to walk with one’s legs wide apart; 4. to refuse to commit oneself; hedge —n. the act or position of straddling
• Tom turned the chair around and straddled it while leaning his chin on the chair’s back. • It is customary to straddle the saddle when seated on a horse. • Politicians often find that they risk alienating fewer constituents by straddling an issue rather than coming down on one side or the other of it. • Severely bowlegged people walk with a straddle, as if they had a saddle between their legs. • It doesn’t pay to straddle the question of whether or not to allow the state to infringe on your freedoms. • Straddling is a favorite occupation of many politicians, known as fence sitters.
[-d, straddling
straightforward (STRAYT FAWR woerd) adj.
1. direct; moving straight ahead; 2. frank; honest; open; 3. clear; unambiguous
• Perry found that the best way to tackle a problem is the straightforward one; that is, attack it head on. • It is best to be straightforward in our relationships with others, as that encourages them to be the same way with us. • Rose has found that when she needs something done, the more straightforward she is in her instructions, the more likely it is that the job will be done the way she wants it.
subjective (suhb JEK tiv) adj.
governed by what is in one’s mind, rather than by reality; not objective; personal; introspective
• How to behave in a certain situation is usually a very subjective decision, meaning that no two people would act quite the same. • Subjective reactions are normally the product of one’s total life experiences.
[-ly adv.]
subtlety (SUHT il tee) n.
1. the ability or tendency to be able to make fine distinctions; 2. the quality or condition of being delicately skillful or clever
• Subtlety is the difference between clucking your tongue at a child’s misbehavior and hitting him or her over the head with a sledgehammer. • Subtlety is an acquired skill, brought about by watching the behavior of your role models over the course of time.
[subtleties pl., subtleness n., subtle adj., subtly adv.]
subvert (suhb VOERT) vt.
1. to undermine or corrupt; 2. to overthrow an established power by indirect means
• By reacting to a child’s appeal to override the decision of her father, a mother subverts the father’s authority. • The Persian emperor’s rule was subverted by Alexander the Great’s invasion, when the emperor’s own men killed him
sully (SUH lee) vt.
soil; stain; tarnish or besmirch, especially by disgracing
• Don’t try to sully my reputation as a legitimate trader of riding and draught horses. • To sully someone’s name as an honest businessperson is to ruin their ability to earn a living.
[sullied, -ing] superficial* (soo pir FISH il) adj. 1. limited to the surface; 2. concerned with the obvious only; 3. cursory and quick; 4. shallow; not profound • Jackie’s wounds from her skateboard accident were only superficial, thanks to her having worn protective gear. • Frank was only interested in superficial looks and paid no attention to the inner substance of his dates. • Barry learned from a terrible experience that the next time he signs a contract, he had better take more than a superficial look at it first. • The president’s analysis of the economy was, at best, superficial. [-ly adv.] [Syn. shallow, cursory]
supplant (suh PLANT) vt.
1. to replace; supersede; 2. to uproot and replace
• Instructions for operating a light switch dated 03/09/04 are to supplant those of 02/18/56 until further notice. • The white rhododendron in the tub will be used to supplant the purple rhododendron next to the driveway.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. replace
suppress (suh PRES) vt.
1. to subdue; put down; quell; crush; 2. to keep from appearing; 3. to check or stop; keep back; restrain
• The Chinese government’s tanks suppressed the protest in Tiananmen Square. • The plan of the rock group to appear onstage was suppressed by the theater’s owners who feared a riot. • When Diane saw the kindergartener take a melted ice-cream bar from her pocket after getting off the school bus, she suppressed her urge to laugh.
[-ed, -ing]
surfeit (SOER fit) n.
1. excess; too great a supply; 2. pigging out; 3. nausea or discomfort resulting from overindulgence —vt. to feed or supply to fullness or excess; to satiate
• Each year, American farmers produce a surfeit of wheat. • Brad had to loosen his belt, having eaten a surfeit of shrimp from the appetizer platters at Rose’s wedding. • Ian felt surfeit from having drunk too many beers on an otherwise empty stomach. • The wedding feast surfeited every one of the 103 guests.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. satiate]
surreptitious (SOER ep TISH is) adj.
1. clandestine; done in a secret or stealthy way; 2. acting in a secret or stealthy way
• The guests to Joanne’s birthday celebration all received surreptitious invitations so as not to spoil the surprise. • The concealment of the Greek soldiers inside the Trojan horse had to be surreptitious so the Trojans would not suspect anything. • For those of you planning a prison break, it is a good idea to keep your plans surreptitious (wink, wink!).
[-ly adv.] [Syn. secret, clandestine]
susceptible (suh SEP ti bl) adj.
easily affected or emotionally moved; sensitive in nature; easily influenced
• Some children are very susceptible to ear infections. • Most men are susceptible to the appeal of a teary-eyed woman. • Some people who might not give you the time of day are still susceptible to an appeal to their better natures.
[susceptibly adv., susceptibility* n.]
sustain (sus TAYN) vt.
1. to keep up; maintain; prolong; 2. to provide food and sustenance to; 3. to carry the weight and/or burden of; 4. to encourage
• The right pedal on a piano is used to sustain a note long after the key has been released. • It takes a lot of puppy chow to sustain a growing St. Bernard puppy.• When two people transport a piano up a hill on a dolly, the person in the rear sustains the bulk of the weight. • The audience’s reaction to Sybil’s recital was enough to sustain her in pursuing her musical career.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. prolong, support] symphony* (SIM fi nee) n. 1. harmony of sounds, especially of musical instruments; 2. harmony of colors; 3. something noted for harmonious composition; 4. an extensive composition of many parts for a full orchestra • A well-harmonized quartet produces a symphony of sounds to be enjoyed by all. • Van Gogh’s Sunflowers is a symphony of ochres and shades of yellow. • The opening four chords of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony might be the most recognizable four chords of all time.
synergistic (SIN oer JIS tik) adj.
the simultaneous working together of several organs or agencies
• Lifting a heavy object without injuring oneself requires a synergistic working of muscles in the back, arms, and legs. • The Department of Homeland Security was a synergistic effort to create a more effective agency than the separate agencies that comprised it.
[-ally adv.]
synonymous (sin AHN im is) adj.
equivalent or similar in meaning; having the nature of a synonym; being another word or name for
• For many years, but no longer, the word “Volkswagen” was synonymous with inexpensive, economical transportation. • Cliff’sQuickReviews are synonymous with study guides. • Aspirin, which for many years was synonymous with painkiller, was originally a brand name of the Bayer company.
[-ly adv.]
synthesize (SIN the SYZ) vt.
to put together different parts to form a whole; to assemble
• A chemist can synthesize salt from sodium and chlorine. • An electronic instrument can synthesize different timbres and frequencies to simulate the sounds made by real musical instruments.
[-d, synthesizing
talisman (TAL is min) n.
1. something (like a ring, necklace, or bracelet) bearing symbols or engraved figures thought to bring good luck; 2. anything thought to have magic power; something to ward off evil; an amulet
• In many primitive and not-so-primitive cultures, talismans are worn to ward off evil spirits. • Many educated persons have been known to carry a rabbit’s foot as a talisman, despite the fact that it obviously did not bring much luck to the rabbit.
[-s pl.]
tangential (tan JEN shil) adj.
1. diverging or digressing; going off at an angle, like a tangent; 2. just touching on a subject, but not dealing with it at length
• The school superintendent started talking about the school budget but soon went off on the tangential subject of the breakfast program. • While examining the world news section of the newspaper, Sandy took a tangential glance at the baseball scores.
[-ly adv.]
temerity (tim ER it ee) n.
audacity; recklessness; foolhardiness
• Mark was shocked that only a week into skiing lessons, Allison had the temerity to tackle the giant slalom. • Nobody believed that North Vietnam would have the temerity to attack South Vietnam while it was under American protection, but we all know how that turned out.
temperament (TEM per mint) n.
1. one’s usual state of mind or disposition; nature; natural disposition; 2. excitability; moodiness; capriciousness; volatility
• Collies usually have a very even temperament and are very good at herding children who try to stray. • A Jack Russell terrier’s temperament, on the other hand, is frenetic or (as some might say) hyper, and it is in perpetual motion.
[Syn. disposition]
temperance (TEM pir INS) n.
1. self-restraint; moderation in appetite, expression, indulgence, and so on; 2. totally refraining from drinking alcoholic beverages
• It is a good idea to exercise temperance in the amount of fried foods that one eats in a week. • The temperance movement was responsible for the U.S. Prohibition era of the 1930s.
tenacious (ten AY shis) adj.
1. holding on firmly; retaining well; retentive; 2. persistent; stubborn
• The British are known for being a very tenacious people, which is why they embrace the bulldog as their national mascot. • When he fell over the cliff, Carl held on to the tree root with a tenacious grip until rescuers could reach him.
[-ly adv., tenacity n.] [Syn. persistent
tendency (TEN din see) n.
1. an inclination, bent, or propensity to move in a certain direction; 2. an apparent moving toward some particular purpose; drift; 3. a purpose or point of view
• Things set in motion have a tendency to remain in motion until interfered with by an outside force. • An object at rest has a tendency to remain at rest until acted upon by an outside force. • Isaac Newton’s tendency was to state things as laws, such as the two laws of inertia stated above. • The tendency of the American people during the 1980s and 1990s was to move politically toward the right.
[Syn. drift, trend]
tentative (TEN tuh TIV lee) adj.
1. proposed, but not definite; uncertain; 2. timid; hesitant
• The tentative time for our next meeting is Tuesday at 7 P.M., but check back before putting it on your calendar. • Joanne wanted to ask Arthur to the dance, but her approach to him was, at best, tentative.
[-ly adv., -ness n.] [Syn. uncertain]
tenuous (TEN yoo is) adj.
not substantial; flimsy; inconclusive
• The challenger’s lead in the polls is, at best, tenuous. • Nora had a tenuous grip on her tennis racket, and it was at risk of flying out of her hand with each swing.
[-ly adv., -ness n.]
testimony (TES to MOH nee) n.
1. a declaration or statement made under oath, sometimes in response to questioning, before a court of some sort; 2. a public affirmation; any kind of evidence; 3. any sworn statement
• The arresting officer gave testimony at the burglary trial. • The general’s testimony before Congress was that the army was fully prepared. • Lynn’s testimony was given in a letter signed before a notary public.
tether (TE thir) n.
a rope or cord fastened to something to prevent its escape —vt. to tie up or confine something/someone using a tether
• Tetherball is played using a ball attached to a stake by a tether. • It is not unusual to find a dog tethered to a lamppost while its owner is in the grocery store. • Never tether your dog for any length of time in the presence of hot sunlight with no recourse to shade and fresh water.
[-ed, -ing]
theoretical (THEE uh RET i kil) adj.
1. of or making up an idea or mental concept; 2. limited to theory, but not practical or proven; 3. speculative
• Einstein had a theoretical view of the relationship between energy and mass. • Air travel was purely theoretical until the beginning of the twentieth century. • The existence of life in other galaxies is purely theoretical.
[-ly adv.
therapeutic (THE ri PYOO tik) adj.
working to heal or cure; curative
• Walking is considered to be therapeutic for a sore leg, but how that can be beats me. • Professionals disagree over whether an ice pack or a heat pack is more therapeutic for a sore back.
[-al adj., -ly adv.]
thorough (THOER oh) adj.
1. complete; omitting nothing; 2. absolute; very exact; accurate; 3. paying careful attention to details
• Yolanda gave a thorough accounting of her encounter with the hijacker, taking care to omit no detail. • The doctor gave Edwin a thorough examination, including an electrocardiogram. • The counterfeiter did a thorough job of copying the design for the $50 bill.
[-ly adv.]
throng (THRAHNG) n.
1. a great number of people gathered together; a crowd; 2. a mass of things; multitude —vt. to crowd together
• The happy throng gathered for New Year’s Eve in Times Square. • A throng of fruit flies massed around the cut peach, looking to grab a tasty meal. • The passengers thronged together, hoping to get a seat on the next bus.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. crowd
timorous (TIM er is) adj.
1. full of fear; subject to fear; timid; 2. caused by timidity
• The most memorable use of the word timorous in English literature is in Robert Burns’s To a Mouse, where he refers to it as a “wee timorous beastie.” • It is quite fine for children to be timorous about talking to strangers.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. afraid]
tolerate (TAH ler AYT) vt.
1. to allow; permit; 2. to respect the beliefs of others, although they differ from one’s own; 3. to put up with things or persons who are disliked
• Julie’s parents would not tolerate her playing after school until her homework was done. • Though not a believer in the curative powers of chicken soup, Hal tolerated a well-meant bowl or two when he was laid up with the flu. • Karen tolerated her in-laws’ presence at family gatherings, although she really would have preferred not to see them.
[-d, tolerating] [Syn. bear]
tome (TOHM) n.
a book, especially a large, ponderous, and/or scholarly one
• You know Professor Corey; he’s the one who wrote the thick tome on the eating preferences of different species of termites. • The writings of J. D. Salinger are not really lengthy enough to call tomes, while Leo Tolstoy’s works are a different story.
torpid (TAWR pid) adj.
1. temporarily having lost all sensation and the ability to move (like a hibernating animal); sluggish; 2. slow and dull; apathetic
• A bear, while torpid after just having awakened from hibernation, soon after becomes much livelier. • A sloth, on the other hand, is always torpid. • Certain members of my family have a tendency to be torpid upon the completion of a Thanksgiving feast.
[-ly adv., -ity, torpor n.]
tourniquet (TOER ni kit) n.
a pressure bandage whose purpose is to temporarily clamp off the flow of blood through a part of the body
• The most commonly seen tourniquet among campers is made by tying together two ends of a cloth square, slipping it over a limb, and then twisting a stick through the loop to put pressure on the limb. • A tourniquet is an emergency bandage to prevent excessive loss of blood by a cut trauma subject.
tractable (TRAK ti bl) adj.
1. easily managed, controlled, or taught; docile; compliant; 2. easily workable; malleable
• A horse is most tractable when it is younger than two years of age. • Silver is a very tractable metal but not as much so as copper.
[tractability* n.] [Syn. obedient
tradition (truh DISH in) n.
1. a custom, belief, proverb, or story handed down orally from generation to generation; 2. the act of handing down same; 3. long established practices; precedent; 4. a historic line of principles, attitudes, or codes of behavior
• The story of the Trojan War had been Greek tradition for hundreds of years before Homer wrote it down in The Iliad. • Tradition was often entrusted to minstrels, who were singing storytellers and entertainers. • The Thanksgiving turkey dinner is an American tradition. • Bushido is the Japanese tradition of behavior passed down by the samurai warriors.
trait (TRAYT) n.
1. a distinguishing characteristic or quality; 2. character; 3. a quality of personality
• A palamino horse is distinguishable from all others by the trait of its golden skin color. • Nose shape is a trait that differs less among people than among dogs. • Honesty is a desirable trait, often lacking in used-car salespersons.
[Syn. quality] tranquillity* (tran KWIL i tee) n. the quality or state of peacefulness; calmness; serenity • A pastoral scene is one noted for its apparent tranquillity. • Of course, the artist never portrays the cougar waiting behind the rock to disrupt the tranquillity of the grazing flock
transient (TRAN see int) adj.
1. temporary; passing with time; 2. passing in a short time; fleeting —n. 1. a transient person; 2. a brief electrical surge
• Don’t worry, your in-laws’ visit is a transient one. • Weather in Texas is very transient; if you don’t care for it at the moment, just wait five minutes. • Motels rent their rooms mostly to transients.
[-ly adv., transience n.] transparent* (trans PAR int) adj. 1. capable of being seen through; passing light through so as to be able to distinctly see what is on the other side; neither translucent nor opaque; 2. easily understood; very clear; obvious; 3. frank; without guile • “I wouldn’t want to call you transparent,” Mabel told Todd, “but I can see your car right behind your belly.” • Will’s directions to Doris’s place were transparent. • When a child admires a particular toy in the store, his or her motives are usualy transparent. [-ly adv.] [Syn. clear]
trauma (TROW muh or TRAW muh) n.
1. a bodily shock, wound, or injury; 2. a mental shock or painful emotional experience
• Any cut can be called a trauma, but it is the more severe ones that get immediate attention in the emergency room of a hospital. • Scalding with nearly boiling hot water is one of the most painful forms of physical trauma.
[-tic adj., -tically adv.]
travesty (TRA vis tee) n.
1. a burlesque or grotesque imitation for purposes of ridicule; 2. a crude, distorted, absurd representation of something
• Political cartoonists love to make a travesty of politicians by emphasizing some facial characteristic to a ridiculous extreme. • A travesty was made of Richard Nixon’s jowls, for instance. • Teddy Roosevelt was often portrayed with a monacle, a cigar, and a grotesque shotgun and/or riding crop, making a travesty of his avocations. • The pop diva’s remake of a popular 1960s ballad was considered a travesty by those who knew and loved the original song.
[Syn. caricature]
treachery (TRECH ir ee) n.
1. a betrayal of trust or faith; treason; 2. an act of disloyalty or treason; perfidy
• Benedict Arnold was known for his treachery in delivering the plans of West Point to the redcoats. • Less well known in the United States is the treachery of Vidkund Quisling, whose so-called Fifth Column led to the taking of Norway by Nazi Germany.
tremulous (TREM yoo lis) adj.
1. trembling or quivering; 2. marked by trembling or shaking; 3. timid; fearful; timorous
• Maricella’s tremulous hand made brain surgery an unsuitable occupation for her. • A good singer often has a tremulous voice on a sustained note, known as “tremolo”; bad singers let this tremulousness get out of hand.• It is appropriate to be tremulous when unarmed and face to face with an uncaged 600 lb. Siberian tiger.
[-ly adv., -ness n.]
trivialize (TRI vee uh lyz) vt.
1. to regard or treat as unimportant or insignificant; 2. to make seem unimportant
• It is easy for an adult to trivialize the fears of a child and, by so doing, to traumatize him or her. • A good teacher will not trivialize the questions of students.
[-d*, trivializing, trivialization n.]
truculent (TRUHK yoo lint) adj.
1. cruel; fierce; savage; 2. rude; mean; 3. bellicose; warlike; pugnacious
• Genghis Khan took a truculent attitude toward nearly everyone but his wife, Sylvia. • The North Koreans have been truculent toward those in the South since shortly after World War II.
[-ly adv., truculence n.]
trustee (TRUS tee) n.
1. a person entrusted with the management of someone else’s property or money; 2. a country in charge of administering a trust territory; 3. a group of persons or a board appointed to manage the affairs of an institution
• A trustee is often appointed by a bankruptcy court to manage the applicant’s financial affairs. • The United Kingdom was made trustee over much of the former territory of the Ottoman Empire after World War I. • Many major instutions’ financial affairs are in the hands of a board of trustees.
turmoil (TOER moyl) n.
uproar; confusion; disarray; tumult; commotion
• The floor of the New York Stock Exchange always appears to be in a state of turmoil. • The police do their best to control the turmoil as the crowd leaves the racetrack at the end of the Indianapolis 500. • Fear and turmoil gripped the passengers and crew of the Titanic in their attempt to leave the stricken ship. turpitude* (TOER pi TOOD) n. 1. depravity or vileness; baseness; 2. any instance of the foregoing • One of the approved reasons for removing a public official from office is moral turpitude. • The turpitude of Adolph Hitler is without parallel in modern times.
tyranny (TIR uh nee) n.
1. the government of an absolute ruler; 2. oppressive government; unjust government; 3. cruel and unjust use of authority; harshness; severity; despotism
• The first so-called tyrannies took place in ancient Greece, and tyranny comes from the Greek word tyrant. • Any modern-day dictatorship is a tyranny. • The Reign of Terror, which followed the French Revolution, was not a tyranny in the first sense of the word but was one in the third sense.
[tyrannies pl.
unavailable (UHN uh VAY li bl) adj.
1. that which cannot be obtained or had; unreachable; 2. not willing to attend or serve (in a position)
• When Carol tried to get Gerald’s address, she found it to be unavailable. • The senator from Arizona was unavailable to run as the candidate for vice president.
[unavailably adv.]
unavoidable (UHN uh VOY di bl) adj.
1. something that can’t be avoided; inevitable; 2. that cannot be nullified or voided
• When the car began to skid, hitting the lamppost was unavoidable. • After the summons had been issued by the officer, the need to respond to it was unavoidable.
[unavoidably adv.]
underestimate (UHN doer ES ti mayt) vt.
to undervalue something; set an estimate that is too low —n. too low an evaluation of something’s worth
• The appraiser underestimated the value of the painting in Diane’s living room. • Victor’s conception of how much study time was needed before taking his finals proved to be an underestimate.
[-d, underestimating]
undermine (UHN der myn) vt.
1. to dig beneath; tunnel; mine; 2. to wear away and weaken the supports of something; 3. to weaken or impair, especially by stealthy or underhanded means
• The prisoners undermined the wall in an attempt to escape. • The bridge’s supports had been undermined by the rushing waters of the river below it. • The authority of the government was undermined by the actions of the guerrilla forces.
[-d, undermining*] [Syn. weaken]
undesirable (UHN diz YR i bl) adj.
not desirable or pleasing; objectionable —n. an undesirable person
• Using television as a babysitter might have an undesirable effect on the children’s education. • Speaking loudly in a library is considered undesirable behavior. • Vagrants are often treated by society as undesirables.
[undesirably adv.]
unfetter (uhn FET ir) vt.
to free from restraints of any kind; to liberate
• The coach needs to be unfettered so that she can experiment with using different players at different positions. • Unfetter the dog so that he may run about the yard.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. liberate
unheralded (uhn HER ild id) adj.
uncelebrated in advance; unforetold; not preannounced; unpredicted
• The circus’s arrival in town was completely unheralded. • The president made an unheralded trip to the front.
universal (YOO ni VER sil) adj.
1. present or occurring everywhere; 2. not limited or restricted; 3. highly adaptable; usable for many different purposes
• Air is universal where humans are able to live. • The Constitution’s framers believed in a universal right to freedom of speech. • A hammer is one of the few tools that have universal applications.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. general, generic]
unparalleled (uhn PA ruh leld) adj.
unequaled; unmatched; that has no parallel
• The quality of Geoffrey’s cinematography is unparalleled in the history of filmmaking. • Picasso had a grasp of shape relationships that is unparalleled in the known art world.
unresolved (UHN riz AHLVD) adj.
unsettled; undetermined; unexplained; unanalyzed
• The difficulties Ralph and Edna had in understanding one another were unresolved by their having a child. • The chemical composition of the compound remained unresolved, even after analysis by spectrograph.
unutterable (uhn UH tir uh bl) adj.
that can’t be described or expressed; inexpressible
• The shock that Sarah felt was unutterable. • Jack found the words needed to describe the horror he felt upon hearing of the fire were unutterable.
[unutterably adv.]
upstart (UHP stahrt) n.
1. a person who has recently become wealthy, and so is presumptuous or aggressive; 2. one who does not know his/her proper place
• The country club caters to the longtime aristocracy, and its board has always voted to keep upstarts out. • The upstart was reprimanded when he tried to cut into the front of the line
urbanized (OER bin YZD) adj.
changed from countrylike to citylike in character; citified
• The area had only recently become urbanized, having been mostly farms less than a generation ago. • The influx of industry was largely responsible for the urbanized character of Allentown.
urge (OERJ) vt.
1. to plead, allege, strongly advocate; 2. strongly recommend; compel; 3. to incite or provoke
• Jeannie urged Horace to change his mind and visit the zoo. • Philip of Macedon urges his son, Alexander, to go to medical school so that he can become a doctor. • The rabble-rousers urged the crowd to take arms against the government.
[-d, urging] [Syn. press, exhort]
topia (yoo TOH pee uh) n.
1. an imaginary island from a book of the same name by Sir Thomas More, 1516; 2. any idealized place; symbol of perfection; paradise
• Utopia was the name Sir Thomas More gave to his imaginary island. • Many believe that Tahiti is as close as one can come to a utopia in real life; others would select Hawaii.
[utopian adj.
vaccine (VAK seen) n.
a preparation placed into the body to prevent or lessen the effects of a specific infection; disease preventitive; innoculation
• Before Jonas Salk discovered his vaccine, polio was the greatest fear of mothers of young children. • Medical researchers are now seeking a vaccine for cancer.
valid (VAL id) adj.
1. having legal status; binding under the law; 2. legitimate; in force; effective; 3. capable of withstanding criticism or examination
• To drive, one must have a valid driver’s license. • Alternate side of the street parking is valid in New York City except on legal holidays. • No matter how many times something is tried and works, it cannot be proven to be a natural law, yet one case of failure is enough to prove it not valid.
valorous (VAL er uhs) adj.
having or showing courage; bravery; being strong
• Soldiers and sailors are decorated for exhibiting valorous behavior. • The code of chivalry implied an expectation of valorous behavior on the part of medieval knights.
vanquish (VAN kwish) vt.
1. to beat; to defeat in battle; 2. to force into submission
• In times of war, it is the object of armed forces to vanquish the foe. • In chess, it is customary for the vanquished player to concede by upending his or her king.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. conquer]
varied (VA reed) adj.
1. of different kinds; diverse; 2. of different colors; variegated; 3. altered; changed
• America is unique because of the varied cultures of its inhabitants. • Clothing designs are varied in shape, size, and shade. • Having put on 20 pounds since he bought his suit, Bob thought it advisable to have its size varied by a tailor.
[-ly adv.]
variety (vuh RY it ee) adj.
1. the state of being diverse; having many choices; 2. a different form or condition from the usual; 3. many different things taken together (like a variety show)
• A variety of fresh fruits and vegetables are in season during the summer months. • Breakfast can be made more interesting by eating a variety of cereals rather than eating the same one every day. • A variety show offers an assortment of entertainment. varnish* (VAHR nish) n. 1. a resinous preparation used to give wood a glossy protective finish; 2. the hard, glossy surface produced; 3. a glossy or polished manner —vt. 1. to cover with varnish; 2. to make superficially attractive; 3. to polish up; embellish • Varnish may be diluted with turpentine. • Using coasters on varnish helps to prevent its getting discolored by moisture on glass bottoms.• Cary Grant always appeared well varnished in his screen persona. • A fisherman always varnishes his tales about the big one that got away.
[-ed, -ing] venerable* (VEN ir uh bl) adj. 1. deserving of reverence or respect by virtue of age and dignity or position and character; 2. impressive because of age, history, or religious significance • Any Bugatti automobile that has survived to this day can certainly be referred to as venerable. • The dowager empress of China, who reigned during the so-called Boxer Rebellion, was a venerable woman. [venerably adv.]
venerate (VEN ir ayt) vt.
to revere; to regard with great respect; to view as venerable
• Nowadays, teenagers seem to venerate very little, with the exception of the pope and Mick Jagger. • It is customary among Americans to venerate our founding fathers and mothers.
[-d, venerating
verifiable (VER i FY i bl) adj.
capable of being proven true; ascertainible
• For an alibi to be any good, it must be verifiable. • While Jack Benny’s age was clearly verifiable (he was born in 1894 and died in 1974), he claimed to have been 39 for 41 years.
[verifiably adv.]
verisimilitude (ver i si MIL i tood) n.
1. the appearance of being true or real; 2. something having the appearance of being true or real
• The best cubic zirconiums have a verisimilitude that would fool all but an experienced gem expert into thinking they were diamonds. • Often, a verisimilitude is a truth, but if something appears to be too good to be true, then it probably is.
[Syn. truth]
verity (VER i tee) n.
1. conforming to the truth or fact; reality; 2. a principle or belief; a reality
• A skeptic does not believe anything he hears unless he can confirm its verity. • It is a verity that men and women are different.
[Syn. truth]
vestige (VES tij) n.
1. remaining trace of something no longer used or that no longer exists; 2. a trace; a bit; 3. an atrophied or rudimentary organ more fully developed in earlier forms of a species
• The human appendix is a vestige, thought to be from the time when our main source of protein was insects. • A con man would never succeed in conning his mark, unless the story he told had some vestige of truth. • Apes and humans have vestiges of tails, suggesting that some earlier ancestors probably were tailed.
[vestigial adj., vestgially adv.]
vex (VEKS) vt.
1. to disturb, annoy, irritate, especially in a petty or nagging way; 2. to distress, afflict, or plague
• Ian questioned everything he was asked to do, just to vex his parents. • Melissa found it vexing that two-year-old Sebastian listened carefully to what she wanted him to do, smiled at her, and then did whatever he wanted. • Marge continued to be vexed by her rheumatism.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. annoy]
vicarious (vy KAR ee uhs) adj.
1. taking the place of another as a deputy or a stand-in; substituting for another; 2. imagining participation in another’s activity
• The deputy sheriff acts with the vicarious powers of the sheriff when he forms a posse. • When Jill told Fran of her exciting ride down the rapids of the Colorado River, Fran experienced a vicarious thrill.
[-ly adv.
victory (VIK ter ee) n.
1. a final and complete triumph in battle; 2. a specific military battle that ended in triumph for your side; 3. success in any contest requiring the overcoming of obstacles
• Lord Nelson’s victory at Trafalgar is commemorated by a statue in London’s square of the same name. • L’Arc de Triomphe in Paris has seen victories celebrated by armies of several countries. • Some athletes go to the Olympics to compete, while others go seeking victory.
[victories pl.] [Syn. conquest, triumph]
vigilant (VIJ il int) adj.
staying watchful and alert for danger
• When you are outside your home with a child, you must be vigilant at all times. • Cats appear to be vigilant even when they’re asleep.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. watchful]
vigor (VIG oer) n.
1. active force or strength; 2. active or healthy growth; 3. intensity; force; energy
• A defense attorney’s job is to defend his client with vigor. • Rosebushes appear to die in the winter in northern climates, but with the first sign of spring they exhibit new vigor. • It takes the vigor of multiple rocket engines to boost a satellite into orbit.
[-ous adj., -ously adv.]
violence (VY uh lins) n.
1. physical force that causes damage, destruction, and personal injury; 2. intense force and energy, such as that of a tropical storm, earthquake, tornado, and so on; 3. a violent act or deed
• Gang violence has become all too common in certain areas of certain cities. • Battery is an act of violence of one person on another. • Tornadoes often cause violence to people who are caught out in them.
violent (VY uh lint) adj.
1. acting with great force so as to injure, damage, or destroy; 2. caused by an act of violence; 3. furious; extreme; intense
• A homicidal maniac has a tendency to be violent. • Video games depicting violent acts are not necessarily harmful to children, nor are they necessarily helpful. • When cold fronts meet warm fronts, violent weather conditions often develop.
[-ly adv.]
virtue (VOER choo) n.
1. moral excellence and goodness of heart; 2. meritorious in moral quality and rightness of action; 3. effective power or force
• We show virtue by the way we live. • Bill won the day by virtue of having four kings. • The virtue of medicine is well known
viscous (VIS kis) adj.
1. having the consistency of a sticky, coherent fluid; viscid; 2. having viscosity
• The viscous quality of motor oil is what causes it to adhere to engine parts and protect them against wear. • How viscous a liquid can be expressed scientifically as its coefficient of viscosity, with water’s coefficient being 1.
[viscosity n.] vitality* (vy TAL i tee) adj. 1. the power to live, or to go on living; 2. life force; 3. mental or physical energy; 4. the power of an institution to flourish • The question is not how old one is but how much vitality one has. • I’ve seen 80-year-olds with the vitality of 20-somethings, and vice versa. • A chocolate bar can give one some instant vitality. • The vitality of NATO has been open to question since the end of the Cold War.
vitiate (VISH ee ayt) vt.
1. to make impure; to spoil; to corrupt; 2. to pervert; weaken morally; 3. to invalidate a contract
• Using any cheese other than parmigiano reggiano vitiates the authenticity of an Alfredo sauce. • The Roman Empire’s morality vitiated long before the empire crumbled. • Failure to abide by the limits of the contract will serve to vitiate it.
[-d vitiating] [Syn. weaken]
vocalization (VOH kil i ZAY shin) n.
an utterance; something sung or spoken; an articulation
• The mayor gave vocalization to his concern about balancing the budget. • The vocalizations of the tenor at last night’s performance were without equal in Mary’s experience
vocation (voh KAY shin) n.
1. a calling to enter a certain career; 2. any career, profession, or trade
• Eric’s vocation as a beachcomber was sealed from the moment his mother bought him the comb. • Everyone should have some vocation or a railroad car full of money.
vociferously (voh SIF oer is lee) adv.
1. loudly making one’s feelings known; 2. characteristically making a fuss to be sure of being heard
• The crow cawed vociferously, as if complaining about the screen separating it from the cherry pie. • The crowd vociferously yelled at the center fielder to throw the ball to home plate.
[vociferous adj., vociferousness n.] [Syn. clamorously, stridently, boisterously]
vulgar (VUHL goer) adj.
1. common; popular with the great majority of people; 2. in the vernacular; 3. characterized by lack of culture or refinement; boorish
• Certain computer terms like RAM and ROM have found their way into vulgar usage. • Vulgar Latin was quite different from the Latin used in literature. • Richard’s wearing jeans to the opera last Thursday was rather vulgar, in Karen’s opinion.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. coarse, common]
ward (WAWRD) vt.
to fend off; parry; push aside or away —n. 1. the act of guarding; 2. the state of being under guard; 3. a child or other person placed under the guardianship of another or of a court; 4. each of the parts or divisions of a hospital or a jail; 5. an administrative district of a city or town
• The sun tried to ward off the winter cold. • The guard was ward over the second floor. • The class was the ward of the school while in the building. • By order of the court, Burt Ward was made Bruce Wayne’s ward. • The hospital had a maternity ward and a prison ward, which some would say are one and the same. • The congressman was elected to represent the third ward.
[-ed, -ing]
whereas (wair AZ) conj.
1. it being the case that; because; 2. but, on the other hand; 3. in as much as
• Whereas you already have the umbrella, why don’t you open it? • You have the steering wheel, whereas I have the car key. • Whereas tomorrow is your birthday, let’s party today.
whimsical (WIM zi kil) adj.
1. characterized by capriciousness; 2. oddly extraordinary; fanciful; freakish; 3. unpredictable; subject to change
• Artist Peter Max is known for his whimsical cartoons. • Teresa took a whimsical notion to jump into the Pacific Ocean. • We’d love to tell you what the bus schedule is, but as far as we can tell, it’s purely whimsical, depending on the driver’s inclination.
[-ly adv.
wield (WEELD) vt.
1. to handle and use (a weapon or tool, with some skill being implied); 2. to exercise (power, influence, and so on)
• The blacksmith wields his hammer very deftly. • The amount of power the president of the United States wields has increased since the drafting of the Constitution.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. handle]
wilderness (WIL doer nis) n.
1. an uninhabited (by humans), uncultivated region; wild; waste; 2. any open, barren, or empty area, including the ocean; 3. a confused, tangled mass
• Foxes and cougars can thrive only in the wilderness, while deer seem to be better able to coexist with people. • The wilderness of the Brazilian rain forest is rapidly disappearing. • Laura hadn’t combed or cut her hair in two years, so when she went to the stylist, he was greeted with a tangled wilderness of hair.
[Syn. waste
abacus (AB i kuhs) n.
a frame with beads on wires in rows of fives and twos separated by a “reckoning bar,” of Chinese origin
• The abacus is one of the earliest arithmetic calculators. • Don’t confuse an abacus with the very similar Japanese soroban that has rows of beads split into fours and ones.
aberration (ab oer AY shin) n.
1. a departure from the normal; 2. a deviation from what is right or correct
• Barbara’s taking the shortcut home was an aberration from her normal driving pattern. • Jack was prone to mental aberrations that caused him to believe he was being persecuted.
abeyance (uh BAY ins) n.
a temporary suspension or delay of a function or activity
• The rainstorm caused the baseball game to be held in abeyance. • The judge decided to hold sentencing in abeyance until the convicted person’s counsel could arrange for character witnesses.
abjure (ab JOOR) vt.
1. to give up rights, allegiance, and so on under oath; to renounce; 2. to recant
• By his divorce agreement, Ken abjured all rights to the family car. • On cross-examination, Doris abjured her previous testimony about having seen the burglar.
[-d, abjuring] [Syn. renounce]
abrade (uh BRAYD) vt.
scrape; wear out by rubbing; rub off
• Sally used a pumice stone to abrade the dead skin off her right foot. • Sanding is a good way to abrade rough spots off a piece of furniture before applying the finish. • Grinding wheels are used to abrade metal objects.
[-d, abrading] [Syn. scrape]
abrogate (AB ruh GAYT) vt.
to repeal or cancel (by authority); annul
• Only a court has the right to abrogate a wedding. • You may not abrogate your obligation to support your children unless a court rules so.
[-d, abrogating] [Syn. abolish]
accretion (uh KREE shin) n.
1. growth in size, especially by addition or accumulation of material; 2. accumulated matter
• The accretion of sand brought in by the ocean has caused certain beaches to grow in size. • Regular brushing is needed to remove the accretion of plaque on one’s teeth.
[(to) accrete vi., vt.
accumulate (uh KYOOM yoo LAYT) vt.
to pile up; gather; form a heap
• Over years of saving regularly, wealth accumulates. • Dirty laundry accumulates on the floor of any boy’s room. • In the autumn, leaves accumulate on the lawn in the temperate climate regions.
[-d, accumulating] [Syn. heap]
adjunct (AD junkt) n.
1. an addition; something secondary in importance; 2. a person who is a helper of another —adj. an assistant, such as an adjunct teacher, counselor, and so on
• A police officer usually carries a second gun as an adjunct to his service weapon. • A pointer can be a useful adjunct at most slide shows. • An adjunct teacher is often found in a primary school classroom in addition to the classroom teacher.
adrenaline (uh DREN uh lin) n.
first appeared as a trademarked name coined by chemist J. Takamine, who isolated it in 1901; now the nontechnical name for epinephrine, a hormone produced by the inner cortex of the adrenal glands
• Adrenaline causes the body’s functions to temporarily speed up. • The body is stimulated to produce adrenaline in response to perceived emergency situations.
adroit (uh DROYT) adj.
skillful either mentally or physically; clever; expert at
• Andy had become quite an adroit chess player by the time he was 17. • Gino was extremely adroit with a wheelbarrow full of wet concrete.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. dextrous]
adulterate (uh DUHL toer AYT) vt.
to make impure; water down; to make inferior
• Cream is adulterated with milk to make half-and-half. • Teachers often adulterate their criticism of pupils’ work so as not to overwhelm them. • Legislation can be so adulterated by amendments that it does not do what it was originally intended to accomplish.
[-d, adulterating] [Syn. dilute]advocate (AD vuh KAYT for vt., AD vuh kit for n.) vt. to speak or write in favor of something —n. a person who pleads the case of another (for example, a lawyer) or who supports a specific action • Fred wrote to advocate tax reform for the state. • Marsha advocates freedom for all to enjoy ice cream without increasing in size or weight. • Alice is Jose’s advocate in his suit against the city for overassessing the value of his property. • Noreen is an advocate for the rights of homeless people. [-d, advocating] [Syn. support]
affinity (uh FIN i tee) n.
1. close relationship; connection; 2. similarity of structure; 3. affection; liking for
• Helen always felt a great affinity for Al. • Tuna and mayonnaise have a close affinity to one another. • Though they are all Romance languages, Italian has a greater affinity to Spanish than to French.
affirm (uh FOERM) vt.
1. to declare to be true; assert the truth of; 2. to confirm; uphold; ratify
• Jerry came to Ann to affirm the validity of Laura’s tale. • The Senate affirmed the nomination of the secretary of state.
[-ed, -ing, -ation n.] [Syn. assert
aggrandize (uh GRAN dyz) vt.
1. to make greater, richer, more powerful; 2. to make seem richer
• By certifying the landfill as a suitable building site, the county helped to further aggrandize its owner. • Although not earning a dollar from the transaction, its very happening aggrandized Otto’s reputation.
[-d, aggrandizing] [Syn. enrich]
agronomy (uh GRAHN uh mee) n.
management of farmland; the science of producing crops
• For a farmer to get the most from his land, he needs to have some understanding of agronomy. • Agronomy teaches that rotating crops allows the land to replenish its essential nutrients after they’ve been used.
allegory (AL ig AWR ee) n.
a story in which people, things, and ideas have hidden meanings, often used as a way of teaching values
• Aesop’s fables are probably the best-known allegories in all literature. • An allegory always has a message apart from its obvious one, which in Aesop’s case is provided in the moral at the end.
[allegories pl.]
alleviate (uh LEEV ee AYT) vt.
1. to lighten; make less hard to bear; 2. to reduce or lessen pain
• Lloyd took one of the boxes of books from Arlene to alleviate the load that she was carrying. • Tears often alleviate the burden of emotional stress.
[-d, alleviating] [Syn. reduce]
allocate (AL uh KAYT) vt.
1. to earmark or set aside for a specific purpose; 2. to distribute; mete out
• The city allocated $200 million to improve mass-transit facilities. • Having collected hundreds of donated winter coats, it was now up to the lodge to allocate them among the less fortunate.
[-d, allocating] [Syn. allot] alloy (uh LOY for vt., A loy for n.) vt. 1. to fuse two or more metals to form one that possesses new properties; 2. to reduce the pureness of a rare metal by fusing it with a less precious one —n. a metallic substance derived from the chemical fusion of two or more metals • Wrapping a strip of copper arround tin does not make an alloy; the tin and copper must be smelted at high heat to form the new metal, bronze. • Iron is alloyed with carbon and several other metals to produce steel. • Fourteen-karat gold is produced by alloying 24-karat pure gold with other metals. [-ed, -ing
amalgamate (uh MAL guh MAYT) vt.
1. to join together into one; to unite; to combine; 2. to alloy into an amalgam (an alloy of mercury and another metal, used by dentists in fillings)
• Many smaller companies were amalgamated to form some of today’s corporate giants, such as General Electric and U.S. Steel. • Mercury and silver are amalgamated to form the amalgam that is losing popularity with dentists as a filling material.
[-d, amalgamating]
ameliorate (uh MEEL ee uh RAYT) vt.
to make or become better; to improve
• A visit by a professional cleaning service should ameliorate the mess in our living room. • The automobile company recalled all 2004 model cars to ameliorate the problem with the steering pump.
[-d, ameliorating] [Syn. improve
amenable (uh MEN i bl or uh MEEN i bl) adj.
1. responsive; answerable to; 2. controllable; submissive
• Would you be amenable to someone’s making you an offer for your car? • Pneumonia is amenable to treatment with antibiotics.
[amenably adv.] [Syn. obedient
amortize (uh MAWR tyz) vt.
1. to put money aside at intervals to pay off a debt either prior to or at maturity; 2. to prorate an expense over an interval (for tax purposes)
• A mortgage is usually amortized over a period of 5 to 30 years, with 30 being the most common term. • An automobile purchased for business use must be amortized over 5 to 7 years rather than taken as a single deduction all at once.
[-d, -zing]
animosity (an i MAH sit ee) n.
hostility; a feeling of strong ill will; dislike
• There is a great deal of animosity between Boston Red Sox fans and New York Yankee fans. • Veterans from Germany and America have met each other in the cemeteries of France to show that they have no animosity for each other left over from World War II.
[Syn. enmity]
annul (uh NUHL) vt.
to nullify; void; cancel; put an end to; invalidate under the law
• Only one amendment to the U.S. Constitution stands out as unique in that it annuls another. • Most contracts contain a paragraph listing the conditions under which it may be annulled.
[annulled, annulling] [Syn. abolish]
anomalous (uh NAM uh lis) adj.
1. deviating from the regular rule; strange; abnormal; 2. being or seeming irregular; contradictory
• It was the anomalous behavior of the planets Neptune and Uranus that led to astronomers discovering Pluto in 1930. • Observations of anomalous behavior of certain objects in the sky have led to reportings of UFO sightings.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. irregular]
antibody (AN ti BAH dee) n.
a special protein produced by certain white blood cells to form immunity to certain antigens
• Before the Salk vaccine stimulated the production of antibodies against it, polio was the most dreaded disease in the United States. • Each antibody produced by white blood cells is specific to a particular disease.
[antibodies pl.]
antipathy (an TIP ith ee) n.
1. a strong or deeply felt dislike; 2. the object of that dislike
• It is rumored that dogs have a great antipathy for cats, yet Lois’s two dogs and three cats get along famously. • Jan’s new hairdo was the object of Kaj’s antipathy.
[Syn. aversion
apprehension (AP ri HEN shin) n.
1. arrest or capture; 2. mental grasp (of); 3. anxiety; dread; 4. judgment; opinion
• The bank robber’s apprehension was the number one priority of the Boston police. • Carl had no apprehension of the effort that had been put into writing the computer program. • Harvey looked forward to his day in court with considerable apprehension. • Apprehension is a very strange word, in my apprehension.
arabesque (a ruh BESK) n.
1. a complex decorative design found in Moorish architecture, with intertwined lines suggesting foliage, flowers, and so on; 2. a ballet position in which one leg is extended straight back, one arm is stretched forward, and the other arm is stretched backward; 3. a light musical composition
• Moorish architecture is distinguished by its arabesques, which might be carved into the stonework or might be in relief. • A ballet dancer’s arabesque is a pose that I would not have attempted even when I was 17 years old. • Pianists are likely to have encountered the arabesques of Robert Schumann.
arboreal (ahr BAW re uhl) adj.
having to do with trees; living in trees or designed for trees
• Most botanical gardens have their arboreal sections. • Tree sloths are among the arboreal creatures that like to just hang out.
[-ly adv.]
archaeology (ahr kee AHL ij ee) n.
the scientific study of the past (especially of past civilizations and cultures through excavation of their cities, their artifacts, and so on)
• Archaeology is responsible for most of what we know about the pharoahs of Egypt. • Archaeology is relatively new in America, and yet it is amazing what it can tell us about the early inhabitants of the western United States.
[archaeological adj.]
archaic (ahr KAY ik) adj.
1. belonging to an earlier period; antiquated; 2. old fashioned; 3. no longer in use, except for special occasions
• Oar-powered galleys were in fashion in ancient times, but today would be thought of as archaic. • Some would say that wearing a tie and jacket in the workplace is an archaic custom. • The use of Latin in Catholic Church services has been ruled by Vatican II to be archaic.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. old
ardor (AHR doer) n.
1. eagerness; enthusiasm; zeal; 2. warm passion; fire
• Zelda embraced her new job as editor in chief with ardor. • The old-timer spoke with ardor as he recounted tales of the good old days in the 1970s.
[Syn. passion] articulate (ahr TIK yoo LAYT for verb, ar TIK yi lit for adj.) vt. 1. to annunciate; to speak; to put into spoken or written words; to express clearly; 2. to arrange in connected sequence —adj. 1. having parts connected by joints; 2. well spoken; able to speak; 3. clearly presented • It fell to Abraham Lincoln to articulate the needs and wishes of his constituents. • Many new automobiles have windshield-wiper arms that articulate to clean more of the windshield than the older ones. • Bones of human legs are articulated at the knees and at the ankles. • It is a plus in the business world if you are articulate. • Katherine’s presentation to the school board was very articulate. [-d, articulating, -ness n.]
artifact (AHR ti FAKT) n.
anything man-made (especially a primitive tool, vessel, or weapon)
• Artifacts from the wreck of the Titanic are making their rounds of American and British museums. • The earliest artifacts to have survived to the present time are from the Old Stone Age
asperity (uhs PER it ee) n.
roughness or harshness of surface, weather, sound, or temperament
• The asperity of the moon’s surface is approximated in Idaho’s Craters of the Moon National Monument. • The area of the United States known as tornado alley is infamous for the asperity of its summer weather.
[asperities pl.]
aspiration (AS pir AY shin) n.
1. a strong desire or ambition; 2. breathing in, as of dust or pollen into the lungs
• It was always Henry’s aspiration to become a doctor. • It is essential to wear a mask when sanding to lessen the risk of dust aspiration.
assail (uh SAYL) vt.
1. to attack physically, or with arguments; assault; 2. to begin working (on a task) with vigor
• Joshua assailed the walls of Jericho with trumpets—or so the story goes. • The opposing party assailed the ruling party’s budget bill with alacrity. • Jason assailed the job of drywalling the bathroom with an energy his father lacked. • The sound from the boom box assailed Sally’s ears.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. attack]
assimilation (uh SIM il AY shin) n.
the absorption and incorporation of one thing into another
• It is up to our digestive tracts to perform assimilation of the nutrients from the food that we ingest. • Assimilation of diverse cultures is what has made the United States the melting pot of modern civilization.
[(to) assimilate vt.]
assuage (uh SWAYJ) vt.
1. to lessen; allay (for example, pain); 2. to calm; pacify (for example, anger); 3. to relieve hunger or thirst
• Take two aspirin or acetominophen if you are an adult and are seeking to assuage the pain of a headache. • Checks arriving on time might help to assuage the dissatisfaction of the company’s laborers. • Take a canteen full of water with you on a hike to assuage the thirst that is bound to come.
[-d, assuaging] [Syn. relieve]
aver (uh VOER) vt.
to declare to be true; affirm; state positively
• A witness at a trial must aver that everything he or she will say will be true. • Don’t aver that Bob was where he says he was, unless you witnessed it yourself. • I aver that I am getting a headache.
[averred, averring] [Syn. assert
baste (BAYST) vt.
1. to sew with long, loose stitches to keep a garment together prior to the actual final stitching; to tack; 2. to moisten meat while roasting with drippings, melted butter, and so on
• Tailors baste a garment together to line everything up before they do the actual stitching of the finished item. • When cooking a turkey, it is customary to baste it every 20 minutes or so to keep it moist.
[-d, basting]
benevolent (bin EV il int) adj.
inclined to do good or doing good; kindly; charitable
• John’s family had a history of being benevolent toward charities. • The March of Dimes counts on its reputation for contributions from benevolent organizations and individuals.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. kind]
benign (bi NYN) adj.
1. good natured; favorable; beneficial; 2. noncancerous; nonmalignant
• Beatrice gave Roger a benign smile as she passed. • Vera was relieved to learn from her oncologist that the tumor was benign.
bigotry (BIG uh tree) adj.
the behavior, attitudes, and beliefs of a prejudiced, intolerant person
• Miguel demonstrated his bigotry by refusing to sit at a table with anyone who was not from Uruguay. • Belief in racial stereotypes is characteristic of bigotry.
[bigotries pl., bigot n.]
bland (BLAND) adj.
1. mild and soothing rather than harsh and grating; 2. without taste; flavorless; insipid; dull
• Milk is a very bland drink when compared to orange or grapefruit juice. • Tex-Mex food is noted for the piquantness of its flavor and is anything but bland.
[-ness n.] [Syn. smooth, tasteless]
boggle (BAHG il) vt.
1. to confuse or overwhelm; 2. to hesitate at (because of scruples)
• Janice was boggled by the huge pile of papers that needed correcting. • Crossword puzzles often boggle the mind. • Eddie boggled at the idea of robbing a grocery store.
[-d, boggling
bogus (BOH gis) adj.
not real or genuine; spurious
• Bogus Rolex watches are available on every street corner around Times Square for $50 or less. • If someone offers you a diamond solitaire for about $100, there’s a good chance that it’s bogus.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. false]
boisterous (BOY stris) adj.
1. noisy and unruly; rowdy; 2. rough and stormy
• Football crowds can get somewhat boisterous, especially when beer is being consumed. • Try to keep from being too boisterous when you play with your friends.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. vociferous]
bolster (BOHL stir) vt.
to prop up or support; reinforce —n. 1. a long, narrow cushion; 2. any bolsterlike cushion or support
• Diane’s family came to bolster her during her testimony. • Please put the bolsters back on the sofa. • Bolsters are used to cap the bearing part of a beam and extend its support outward.
[-ed, -ing]
bombast (BAHM bast) n.
talk or writing that sounds very important but has no meaning; pompous language
• “You make your bed right now or I’m not going to feed you for the next week” is either an example of bombast or an indication of child abuse. • Nikita Khrushchev’s “We shall bury you!” speech is a better-known example of bombast.
[-ic adj., -ically adv.]
boor (BOR) n.
a rude, ill-mannered, or awkward person
• Stop acting like a boor. • When Cindy turned her back on Rita and refused to acknowledge her greeting, she behaved boorishly.
[-ish adj., -ishly adv.]
bourgeois (BUR zhwah or bur ZHWAH) adj.
conventional; middle class; ordinary —n. 1. a shopkeeper or a businessman; 2. a member of the middle class
• It is often considered an insult to call one’s beliefs bourgeois. • The bourgeois class, before the French Revolution of 1789, was the group of shopkeepers and self-employed persons between the aristocracy and the workers (or proletariat).
[-e fem., -ie n.]
brazen (BRAY zin) adj.
1. showing no shame; bold; impudent; 2. of brass; the color of brass
• Custer’s attack at the Little Bighorn was brazen if not very smart. • Trumpets have a very piercing, brazen sound.
[-ly adv.
broach (BROHCH) vt.
1. to start a discussion of; bring up; introduce; 2. to drill a hole (in a cask); to tap (a keg) —n. a tool for drilling
• Peggy broached the subject of going to the movies tomorrow evening. • Given how hot it had been all day, someone was bound to broach the idea of going swimming. • Tom broached the cask of root beer using a tool known (appropriately enough) as a broach.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. utter]
buoyant (BOY int) adj.
1. having or showing the ability to float; 2. having the ability to lift one’s spirits
• A life vest makes one buoyant so that should you accidentally fall from a boat, you would float. • Spiritual songs are often buoyant, lifting one’s spirits.
[-ly adv., buoyancy n.]
burnish (BOER nish) vt.
to make or become shiny by rubbing; polish —n. a gloss or a polished finish
• Verna burnished the silverware in preparation for the big dinner. • After being polished, the mirror had a nice burnish.
[-ed, -ing
cacophony (kuh KA fin ee) n.
harsh, jarring sound; noise
• A cacophony of automobile and truck horns greeted the ears of pedestrians walking by the traffic jam. • When the 35 members of the second-grade band began to play their instruments, the audience was greeted with a cacophony of screeches.
[cacophonous adj., cacophonously adv., cacophonies pl.]
cadge (KADZH) vt.
to beg or to acquire as a result of begging; to sponge
• Most children learn to cadge (or not to) at an early age. • Jason never cadged; he just asked for two of anything he wanted, figuring that his parents would compromise and get him one.
[-d, cadging]
calibrate (CAL ib RAYT) vt.
to fix, check, or adjust the graduations of an instrument of measurement, such as a meter or scale
• Most bathroom scales need to be calibrated by means of a knurled knob. • Instant-read meat thermometers can be calibrated by turning their dials.
[-d, calibrating]
caliper (KAL ip oer) n.
1. an instrument with two curved legs joined at one end by a rivet and used to measure thicknesses and diameters; 2. the part that presses against the spinning wheel in a bicycle brake or on a car’s disc brakes
• By swinging the legs of a caliper apart and then bringing both tips to the opposite sides of a glass, the glass’s outside diameter can be measured. • Disk brakes bring a car to a stop by the calipers pressing their pads against the captive rotors.
camouflage (KAM uh FLAHZH) vt.
to disguise a person or thing to conceal it (from an enemy) —n. any such disguise or disguising
• It is customary to camouflage soldiers and weapons to keep them hidden from the enemy. • Camouflage is worn by all U.S. soldiers and Marines under battlefield conditions.
[-d, camouflaging]
caustic (KAHS tik) adj.
1. able to eat away, burn, and destroy living tissue by chemical means; corrosive; 2. biting or sarcastic in wit; cutting type of humor or remark
• Some acids are more caustic than others, and you don’t want to get them on your skin. • Sarcasm is caustic wit at its most virulent.
[-ally adv.] [Syn. corrosive, sarcastic
cavalier (KAV uh LEAR) adj.
1. casual or unconcerned attitude; an indifference to matters of concern or importance; 2. arrogant and haughty —n. 1. a knight or armed horseman; 2. a courteous, gallant gentleman
• Barry had a cavalier attitude about his manners, and it would someday come back to haunt him. • Vaughn was so cavalier that most others felt he was looking down his nose at them. • Part of the outfit of a French cavalier was a wide-brimmed felt hat with an ostrich plume sticking out. • Cavaliers made a point of helping damsels in distress.
[-ly adv.]
charisma (kuh RIZ muh) n.
a special quality or charm that encourages loyalty or devotion
• Joan of Arc’s charisma is what made her soldiers follow her leadership. • A rock star or a movie star who has charisma attracts a large band of devotees.
[-tic adj., -tically adv.]
chary (CHAI ree) adj.
1. careful; cautious; 2. not giving freely; sparing
• Tania was chary of hurting anyone’s feelings. • The cafeteria attendant was chary of the size of the portions she meted out.
[charily adv.] [Syn. wary]
chemical (KEM ik uhl) adj.
1. of or having something to do with chemistry; 2. made by or used by chemistry —n. 1. involving the use of alcohol and/or drugs; 2. any of the chemical elements or a compound thereof
• Chemistry studies how chemicals interact or fail to interact. • A chemical reaction always occurs when an acid and a base are mixed together, with the resulting compounds being a salt and water. • It is essential that people avoid developing dependencies on chemicals. • If a chemical is an acid, its formula always contains an H (for hydrogen).
[-ly adv.]
churlish (CHOER lish) adj.
1. boorish; surly or mean; 2. peasantlike; ill mannered; ill bred
• It was Shirley’s churlish nature that kept everyone at a distance from her. • Evan was churlish, as if he’d been brought up in a barn.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. boorish
circumspect (SIR kuhm SPEKT) adj.
cautious; careful to consider all aspects before judging, acting, or deciding
• It is a good idea to be circumspect in selecting stocks to invest one’s money in. • Being circumspect before walking behind a horse is always a worthwhile undertaking.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. careful]
circumvent (SIR kuhm VENT) vt.
1. to go around; 2. to get the better of by cleverness or craftiness
• Very frequently, people try to circumvent the need to pay sales tax by buying online. • Some landlords incorrectly think that if they lock tenants out, they can circumvent the eviction process.
[-ed, -ing]
coagulant (koh AG yoo lint) n.
something that causes a liquid to coagulate or become solid; solidifier (used especially when referring to blood)
• Thrombin is an element in the blood that acts as a coagulant, changing fibrinogen into fibrin—the stuff clots are made of. • The coagulants that turn milk into cheese are bacteria. • Whipping is the coagulant that turns cream into butter.
coagulate (koh AG yoo layt) vi.
to change from a liquid to a semisolid mass; clot; curdle
• Milk coagulates to form cheese. • Blood coagulates to form a scab, protecting the body from invasion by bacteria. • Cream, when churned enough, coagulates to form butter.
[-d, coagulating
coddle (KAH dil) vt.
1. to treat tenderly; pamper; 2. to cook eggs in the shell gently in not-quite-boiling water for two to three minutes
• Babies must be coddled while they’re at the helpless stage. • My parents used to enjoy coddled eggs, which I could never understand because I found them runny and gross.
[-d, coddling] [Syn. pamper]
coerce (koh ERS) vt.
1. to persuade by use of force; 2. to persuade by use of threats, legal or otherwise; 3. to constrain by use or threat of force
• The U.S. armed forces were used to coerce Iraq to leave Kuwait. • The Internal Revenue Service is expert at coercing delinquent taxpayers to part with their funds. • Police frequently find it necessary to coerce prisoners to come along with them.
[-d, coercing] [Syn. force]
cogent (KOH jint) adj.
compelling; convincing and to the point (said of verbal means as distinguished from physical)
• Ralph gave Alice several cogent reasons they should vacation at a mountain resort rather than at the beach. • Jackie’s arguments for using regular-grade gasoline rather than high test were particularly cogent, to the tune of 42 cents per gallon.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. valid]
cognitive (KAHG ni tiv) adj.
1. having to do with knowing in the broadest sense; 2. by means of perception, judgment, and conception
• One’s cognitive skills tend to diminish somewhat with the onset of old age. • In judging a baking contest, one relies less on one’s cognitive faculties and more on one’s senses.
[-ly adv.]
cognizance (KAHG ni zins) n.
1. awareness of something; 2. knowledge perceivable by observation; 3. noticing or perception of
• June had no cognizance of the fact that Frank was bringing a guest home to dinner. • Cognizance of the habits of the sperm whale has all been acquired by surveillance. • Before it jumped into his lap, Omar had had no cognizance of the cat’s being present in the room.
complement (KAHMP li mint) n.
1. that which completes or makes perfect; 2. the full amount; 3. either of two parts that complete each other
• Butter and jam complement the flavor of a piece of toasted bread. • Georgia had a full complement of 10 fingers and 10 toes. • For a proper handshake, another person’s right hand is the perfect complement to one’s own.
[Syn. completer
component (kuhm POH nint) n.
1. a basic part of something; 2. any part of a high-fidelity system (speaker, tuner, amplifier, and so on); 3. an element or ingredient
• The engine is just one component of a complete automobile, albeit a very important one. • Stereo component systems are generally of higher quality than those that come all in one box. • Egg whites are a major component of lemon meringue pie.
[Syn. element]
conceivable (kuhn SEE vib il) adj.
that can be imagined, thought of, or understood
• Just a century ago, travel outside of earth’s atmosphere was conceivable only to science-fiction writers. • Our reliance on electricity has reached the point where life without it is barely conceivable.
[conceivably adv.] [Syn. imaginable
concentrate (KAHN sin TRAYT) vt.
1. to collect and focus; 2. to increase in strength or density —vi. same meanings as 1 and 2 —n. a liquid that has been made denser by removing some of its solvent
• Concentrate your thoughts on improving your vocabulary. • Concentrate the orange juice for shipping purposes. • Sometimes it is hard to concentrate on a task.• The intensity of light concentrates as you get nearer to the source. • Grape juice can be made from grape concentrate.
[-d, concentrating]
concentration (KAHN sin TRAY shin) n.
1. fixed attention on some task; 2. the density of something
• After you’ve graduated from school, you’ll want to turn your full concentration to landing a job. • The concentration of orange juice in a frozen can is four times that of the juice we drink.
conciliatory (kuhn SIL ee uh TAW ree) adj.
1. trying to soothe anger; 2. gaining by friendly acts; making friendly
• When Jack saw how angry the fall had made Jill, he made a conciliatory attempt to calm her. • South Korea has made several conciliatory moves toward its neighbor to the north.
[conciliatorily adv.] [Syn. pacifying]
concur (kuhn KOER) vi.
1. to occur at the same time; coincide; 2. to act together; 3. to agree; to be in accord
• The phases of the moon and the changes in the oceans’ tides have been known to concur. • Two persons must concur in the direction of their motion to operate a twohandled tree saw. • For the Supreme Court to come to a decision, five justices must concur.
[-red, -ring] [Syn. consent]
condone (kuhn DOHN) vt.
to forgive, pardon, or overlook (a misdeed)
• It is not easy to condone one’s cheating on an examination in mathematics class. • Hunting members of endangered species as trophies is a practice that cannot be condoned.
[-d, condoning]
consistent (kuhn SIS tint) adj.
1. in accord, agreement, or harmony; compatible; 2. always following the same principles
• It was the Mikado’s aim to have the punishment be consistent with the crime. • In raising children, it is very important for parents to be consistent in their expectations.
[-ly adv.]
conspirator (kuhn SPEE rit er) n.
one who conspires; one who acts with others to plan a crime
• Cassius and Brutus were the two most famous conspirators in the assassination of Julius Caesar. • Despite what the Warren Commission report says, most Americans are convinced that there were other conspirators beside Oswald in the assassination of President Kennedy.
[Syn. plotter
contemplative (kuhn TEM pli tiv) adj.
1. inclined to look at intently; inclined to gaze at; 2. tending to study closely 3. being involved in a meditative religious order
• Paul was very contemplative of the faces of the men in the lineup, seeking to pick out the killer. • Olga was contemplative of her geometry facts as she prepared for her final exam. • After joining a contemplative order of monks, Tom became known as Brother Jerome.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. pensive]
contentious (kuhn TEN shis) adj.
1. always ready for an argument; quarrelsome; 2. likely to provoke a disagreement; provoking controversy
• Defense attorneys tend to be contentious, which is what their clients are paying them for. • As election day approaches, politicians’ behavior grows more and more contentious.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. belligerent]
contradiction (KAHN truh DIK shin) n.
1. in opposition to another position; a denial; 2. a condition in which things are contrary to each other; 3. having elements that appear opposed to one another
• According to Tom, Jerry’s account of the accident was a contradiction of the facts. • The history of Germany in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries is a series of contradictions. • Racism is a contradiction to the principles expressed in the U.S. Constitution.
[Syn. denial]
conventional (kuhn VEN shuh nil) adj.
1. growing out of custom or normal usage; customary; 2. conforming to accepted standards, rather than natural; 3. non-nuclear
• Saying please and thank you is just part of conventional, polite manners. • It is conventional to peel a banana before eating it. • Conventional weapons have become so dangerous that the use of nuclear weapons is overkill.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. customary]
convivial (kuhn VIV ee uhl) adj.
1. festive; 2. jovial; fond of having a good time; fond of eating, drinking, and good company
• Most religions have some convivial holiday where celebrating is the rule. • A birthday is usually an occasion for a convivial time.
[-ity n.] [Syn. jovial
convoluted (KAHN vuh LOO tid) adj.
1. coiled or spiraled; 2. very involved; complicated
• Most hoses are convoluted for storage purposes. • A 20-mile-long convoluted unpaved highway climbs from the foot of Pike’s Peak to its summit. • The series of alliances that led to the outbreak of World War I was very convoluted.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. complicated]
copious (KO pee uhs) adj.
1. abundant; very plentiful; 2. wordy; using language to a great extent; 3. full of information
• Always take copious notes during college lectures. • Fidel Castro’s speeches are always copious. • Copious information about careers is available in The Occupational Outlook Handbook, published by the U.S. Department of Labor.
[Syn. plentiful, profuse]
corona (kuh ROH nuh) n.
1. a crown or tiara, or something resembling same; 2. a ring of light surrounding a bright object (like the sun’s corona); 3. an extra whorl of flower parts (as the cuplike shape in daffodils) formed between the inner petals and the stamens
• A corona might grace a king’s head. • The sun’s corona makes a striking display when the sun’s disk is in total eclipse. • The corona of a daffodil is what gives this spring flower its unique shape
correlate (KAW ril AYT) vt.
to bring things into a mutual relation with each other; to show the relationship between quantities —adj. closely related
• One’s salary should correlate with the hours one works. • Sometimes it is difficult to correlate the amount of good someone does in the world with his or her reward.
[-d, correlating]
cosmos (KAHZ mohs) n.
1. the universe seen as an orderly, harmonious whole; 2. any complete and orderly system
• Earth was once thought to be the center of the cosmos. • The periodic table contains the cosmos of chemical elements.
counterpoint (KOWN tir POYNT) n.
1. a melody played or sung against a different melody; 2. something set up to contrast with or counteract something else
• Counterpoint melodies can be found in classical and popular musical compositions. • Political-opinion news shows often offer both a point and counterpoint format to put forth both sides of an argument.
covert (koh VIRT) adj.
concealed; disguised; hidden; surrreptitious
• A submarine is a covert weapon by design. • Undercover organizations exist for covert operations.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. secret]
covetous (KUH vit uhs) adj.
longing with envy for something belonging to another person
• Mr. Jones was very covetous of Mr. Smith’s beautiful green lawn before he discovered it was AstroTurf. • Ginger was covetous of Mary Anne’s wavy hair.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. envious, greedy]
cower (KOW ir) vt.
1. to huddle up as from fear or cold; 2. to shrink with fear as if avoiding someone’s anger or blows
• The Green family cowered in the cold, waiting for the furnace to be repaired. • Lou Costello’s cowering awaiting Bud Abbott’s angry blows was quite a routine, in light of the fact that straight man Abbott was actually Costello’s employee.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. cringe]
craven (KRAY vin) adj.
deathly afraid of; very cowardly —n. a thorough coward
• Lloyd had a craven attitude toward bears. • Some little children are craven about anything with four feet and fur. • Minnie was craven and would not leave her house.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. cowardly
credence (KREE dins) n.
belief (especially in the testimony or words of others)
• The evidence gave Willis’s words credence. • The district attorney did not give credence to the street vendor’s words and wanted to see proof. • Most people do not give credence to UFO stories.
critique (kri TEEK) n.
a critical analysis of something —vt. to analyze something, such as a work of art, a book, and so on; to criticize
• TV critics must produce several movie critiques per week. • Literature students are often asked to critique a work of poetry or prose. • Before one critiques anything, he or she should have some benchmark by which to judge.
[-d, critiquing] [Syn. criticize
cryptic (KRIP tik) adj.
having a hidden or disguised meaning; ambiguous; mysterious
• The sphinx was famous in ancient times for asking cryptic riddles. • The oracle at Delphi gave cryptic prophecies that could be interpreted many different ways.
[-ally adv.] [Syn. obscure
crystal (KRIS til) n.
1. a transparent mineral, especially quartz; 2. such a mineral with a cut or naturally geometric pattern of facets; 3. the transparent covering of the face of a watch; 4. especially clear and briliant glassware
• Crystals of carbon are the hardest known natural substance, also known as diamonds. • Quartz crystals occur in many different colors, with rose quartz being quite common. • Carlotta took her watch to the jeweler for a new crystal.
crystallize (KRIS til YZ) vt.
1. to take on a definite form; 2. to form crystals or crystal-like shapes; 3. to coat with sugar
• It took a while for the plan to crystallize in Gail’s head. • When water vapor crystallizes it forms six-sided snowflakes. • Crystallized ginger is coated with sugar and is delicious but tangy.
[-d, crystallizing, crystallization n.]
culpability (KUHL puh BIL i tee) n.
the responsibility for something’s happening; the blame
• The culpability for a rear-end collision always belongs to the rear car’s driver. • Despite having borrowed his father’s camera without asking permission, Irwin denied any culpability.
[Syn. blame]
cultivate (KUHL ti VAYT) vt.
1. to prepare soil for crop growing; 2. to grow (plants, animals, and so on) from scratch; 3. to improve by training; 4. to develop (a taste for)
• The farmer cultivates with a plow before sowing the first seeds. • Bob cultivates flowers every year, starting them in pots in early May. • In medieval times, monks cultivated trees in the shape of candelabras. • A liking for caviar is a taste one must cultivate, as it is not a naturally appealing food.
[-d, cultivating]
curmudgeon (koer MUHJ in) n.
an ill-mannered, bad-tempered person; a cantankerous person
• Nobody cared to argue with Mr. Jones because he had a reputation for being a curmudgeon. • Miss Smith was such a curmudgeon that it was no wonder she had remained unwed.
cursory (KOER sir ee) adj.
with little attention to detail; done hastily
• Rita took a cursory look at the right front bumper to see whether any damage had been done. • The doctor gave Ben a cursory examination before declaring him fit to return to work.
[cursorily adv.] [Syn. superficial
debilitating (di BIL i TAYT ing) adj.
weakening; making weak and feeble; ennervating
• Lou Gehrig was a great baseball player before developing the debilitating disease, ALS, which carries his name. • When Dylan was 2 years old, he developed a debilitating temper that caused him to bang his head on things.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. weakening]
decimate (DE sim ayt) vt.
to kill or destroy a large part of the population
• The city officials are hoping that by spraying in swamps they will be able to decimate the mosquito population. • Every seven years or so, locusts decimate the crops in some farm areas.
[-d, decimating]
defamation (DEF im AY shin) n.
an injuring of someone’s character by making false statements about him or her; slandering; maligning
• Defamation of character is an offense that one can sue for in a civil court. • The judge ruled that the false statements Girard made about Ruth constituted defamation.
[Syn. slander]
deficiency (di FISH in see) n.
the state of lacking in some essential quality or element; incompleteness; shortage; deficit
• Mark’s intellectual deficiency leaves him two cans short of a six-pack. • When Violet bought the car, she found there was a deficiency in the rear seat belt.
[Syn. shortage] degenerate (di JEN er it for adj. and n., di JEN er AYT for v.) adj. 1. sunken below a former normalcy of condition or character; 2. morally corrupt —n. a degenerate person, especially one who is sexually perverse —vi. to decline morally, culturally, and so on • Helen’s degenerate lifestyle was the result of a difficult childhood. • Does reading degenerate magazines corrupt one, or must one be degenerate to buy such magazines? • Helen, mentioned above, is a degenerate. • As one ages, one’s sense of humor tends to degenerate, and the jokes get racier. [-ly adv.] [Syn. depraved]
demise (dim YZ) vt.
1. to transfer an estate by lease (especially for a fixed amount of time); 2. to transfer sovereignty by abdication or death —n. 1. a transfer of an estate by lease (for a fixed term); 2. the transfer of sovereignty by death or abdicating; 3. death
• “Demising an apartment” is not a phrase you’ll see or hear every day. • The “demise of a monarch” is a much more likely use of the word, even though there are few monarchs left today. • “Death” is the most commonly used meaning of the term, so let this be the demise of this discussion.
[-d, demising] [Syn. death
demographic (DEM uh GRA fik) n.
a vital statistic of human population, such as age, income, sex, and so on, used mainly for marketing research
• Demographics are a major concern to businesses. • Before McDonald’s picks a location for a restaurant, they need to know that the demographics are such that there are many young couples with children that have enough money to eat out a couple times a week.
denigrate (DEN ig RAYT) vt.
1. to blacken; 2. to defame; to disparage the character of
• During an election campaign, it has become customary for one candidate to attempt to denigrate the other’s reputation. • Negative advertising consists of denigrating one’s competitor’s product.
[-d, denigrating] [Syn. defame, disparage]
derelict (DER il ikt) adj.
1. deserted by the owner; forsaken; abandoned; 2. remiss in performance of duty; neglectful of duty; negligent —n. 1. an abandoned property; 2. a destitute person with no home or job
• The derelict boat bobbed up and down in the waves, just waiting to be swamped. • The reason the burglars gained access was because the gate guard was derelict in his duty. • The derelict building was an eyesore and a haven for a swarm of rats. • It is not unusual to see a derelict sleeping in a cardboard hovel by the side of a building on the Bowery.
[-ion n.] [Syn. remiss, negligent]
desiccant (DES ik int) adj.
drying —n. a substance that attracts water and is packed with some goods to prevent water from damaging them
• Silica gel is a desiccant often packaged with pills in a plastic, ventilated tube so that water doesn’t damage the pills. • Desiccants are sometimes packed with clothing or paper goods in little cloth bags.
[Syn. dryer]
desiccate (DES ik ayt) vt.
1. to completely dry; 2. to preserve food by freezedrying, or just drying it
• Cranberries are completely washed and then dessicated before they are packaged for shipping. • Coffee dessicated by freeze-drying is as popular as the brewed type in most homes in the United States.
[-d, desiccating]
desultory (dis UHL ter ee) adj.
1. lacking connection; aimless; random; 2. lacking in relevance
• The professor’s lecture seemed desultory, having no connection to anything the class was studying. • When Francine went to get her blood drawn for the test, the nurse’s asking her to step on the scale seemed to be desultory.
[Syn. random
detest (di TEST) vt.
to intensely dislike; to abhor; to hate
• President George H. W. Bush shocked many growers when he announced that he detested broccoli. • Most people detest having to visit the dentist’s office.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. hate]
deuterium (doo TEAR ee uhm) n.
an isotope of hydrogen (atomic weight of 2.014, symbol D) used in nuclear reactors
• Deuterium oxide is known as heavy water. • Regular hydrogen has a single proton in its nucleus; deuterium’s nucleus has a proton and a neutron.
deviance (DEE vee ins) n.
a turning away from what is usual or what is accepted as being normal
• Pouring orange juice over your breakfast cereal would definitely be considered a deviance from the norm. • Deviance is not necessarily a negative thing, as proven by the Wright brothers at Kitty Hawk in 1903.
[Syn. variance
diatribe (DY i TRYB) n.
an abusive, bitter, ranting criticism or denouncing
• Fidel Castro is renowned for his long diatribes against the U.S. government. • Diatribes tend to cause the listener to close his or her ears and mind after a short length of time.
[Syn. denunciation]
diffidence (DIF i dins) n.
lack of self-confidence marked by hesitation in speech
• Stuttering is often an expression of diffidence. • Diffidence in speech can often be overcome by overpreparing.
[Syn. shyness]
digress (di GRESS) vi.
to momentarily or temporarily stray from the main subject
• Max Schulman’s Dobie Gillis is famous for straying from his subject and then going back to it with the phrase “but I digress.” • While explaining to her class how to find the areas of different quadrilaterals, Mrs. Green digressed and told how much she had enjoyed that day’s lunch.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. deviate]
diminutive (di MIN yoo tiv) adj.
small of stature; much smaller than average; tiny —n. 1. a very small person; 2. a word formed from another by adding a suffix indicating smallness
• Gail was diminutive, with the top of her head barely reaching Michael’s chest. • The diminutive of kitchen is kitchenette.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. small]
dirge (DOERJ) n.
a slow, sad, funereal hymn or poem expressing grief; a lament
• Dirges are customary as part of certain religions’ funeral ceremonies. • An elegy is a type of dirge without music.
[Syn. lament]
disabuse (dis uh BYOOZ) vt.
to get rid of false ideas; to set straight; to free from misconception
• Part of growing up is to disabuse ourselves of the notion that whatever we need will be given to us. • It is just as important to disabuse ourselves of the idea that good deeds are always rewarded.
[-d, disabusing] [Syn. correct]
disburse (dis BOERS) vt.
to pay out; to expend (a sum of money)
• Inez disbursed $23.47 at the grocery store. • On payday, your employer disburses your salary in the form of a paycheck.
[-d, dispersing] [Syn. expend]
discontent (DIS cuhn TENT) n.
a dissatisfaction with a person, thing, or state of affairs; a desire for something more or different —vt. to make discontent
• Now is the winter of our discontent after having shoveled all that snow. • After 10 days of eating steak and potatoes, one becomes discontent with that diet
disinter (dis in TER) vt.
1. to dig up from the grave; to exhume; 2. to bring to light something that had been hidden
• The medical examiner sometimes has to disinter a body from the grave in order to perform an autopsy on it. • It is only with the passage of time that the actual tape recordings of Lyndon Johnson’s White House conversations were disinterred.
[-red, -ring] [Syn. exhume]
disinterestedness (dis IN trist id niss) n.
a lack of caring, involvement, or concern
• When asked whether she would like to go to the Dodgers game, Maria expressed a total disinterestedness. • Joel’s disinterestedness in getting his schoolwork done on time led to his failing grades.
[Syn. indifference]
disputatious (DIS pyoo TAY shis) adj.
fond of arguing; contentious; eager to dispute
• Allen’s disputatious nature made him a likely candidate for the debating team. • Whenever Daphne was accused of being disputatious, she would retort “That’s debatable.”
[-ly adv.]
dissonance (DIS uh nins) n.
1. inharmonious sounds; chords containing clashing sounds; 2. a lack of harmony or agreement; discord; incongruity
• If you want to learn the true meaning of dissonance, go listen to an elementary school band concert. • The later works of Igor Stravinsky are famous for their deliberate use of dissonance
distillation (DIS til AY shin) n.
1. a process by which a liquid is vaporized, and the vapor is cooled to form a purer or more highly concentrated substance; 2. a purifying or refining by distillation
• Alcoholic spirits are removed from fermented mash by means of distillation. • Distillation is used to separate gasoline from crude oil.
[Syn. concentration, purification]
diversity (di VERS i tee) n.
the quality or state of being different or varied
• The diversity of its people is thought to be one of the great strengths of the United States. • An interesting menu in a restaurant should offer the customers a diversity of choices.
[Syn. variety]
divest (di VEST) vt.
1. to strip of clothing or rank; 2. to get rid of unwanted things
• For failing to follow orders, the sergeant was divested of his stripes. • Given the recent performance of the stock market, now seems like a pretty good time to divest your portfolio of poor performers.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. strip]
divulge (di VULJ) vt.
to make known, disclose, reveal
• You must promise never to divulge the location of the hidden treasure, or else! • Unless you pay to see my hand, I do not have to divulge which cards I was holding when I won that hand.
[-d, divulging] [Syn. reveal]
dogmatic (dawg MAT ik) adj.
1. of or like dogma; 2. accepted without proof; 3. stating an opinion with arrogance
• In the early part of the twentieth century, the story about a young George Washington chopping down a cherry tree was dogmatic. • The scientific community encourages its members to question everything and to avoid being dogmatic. • Dr. Jackson tends to be dogmatic when he hands out his diagnoses to the medical students.
[-ally adv.] [Syn. dictatorial]
dolt (DOHLT) n.
stupid, slow-witted person; blockhead
• The way that man slipped into the bus seat before the pregnant woman could take it marks him as a dolt. • Who but a dolt goes out of the house wearing his or her shoes on the wrong feet?
[-ish adj., -ishly adv., -ishness n.
dormant (DAWR mint) adj.
1. asleep; 2. as if asleep; resting; 3. inactive; inoperative
• The night watchman was dormant on the job. • While the cat may appear dormant, it is aware of everything going on around it. • A dormant volcano might not have erupted in the last 100 years, yet it is still alive. • Most of the volcanoes in the Cascades are considered to be dormant.
[-ly adv., dormancy n.] [Syn. latent]
dross (DRAWSS) n.
1. a scum that forms on the surface of molten metal; 2. waste material; worthless stuff; rubbish
• In a steel mill or foundry, dross ends up on the rubbish heap. • Good garage-sale shoppers learn to separate treasure from dross.
dubious (DOO bee is) adj.
1. causing doubt; vague; ambiguous; 2. of doubtful value; questionable; shady; 3. skeptical; hesitating
• Valerie was rather dubious about whether she was coming to the basketball game. • That premium-brand watch being offered by the street salesperson for $30 is of dubious quality.
dynamo (DY ni MOH) n.
1. a forceful, energetic person; 2. an electrical generator
• The chairman of the company was a human dynamo, constantly on the go. • In hydroelectric plants, falling water turns the dynamo that generates the electricity. • That weight lifter is strong as a dynamo.
dysfunctional (dis FUNK shi nuhl) adj.
1. unable to perform normally or properly; 2. showing impaired or abnormal psychosocial functioning
• A person with dysfunctional kidneys has to make use of a dialysis machine. • Serial killers are among the most dysfunctional personalities in the world
edify (ED i FY) vt.
to instruct so as to enlighten or improve morally, intellectually, or spiritually
• It might edify you to know that by the time Mozart was 13, he had been appointed honorary concertmaster at the Court of Salzburg. • Watching how a building is constructed can be a very edifying experience (no pun intended). • Edify means to build, but that usage is pretty much obsolete by now.
[edified, -ing, edification n.]
egalitarian (ee GAL i TER ee in) adj.
advocating that people should all have equal social, economic, and political rights —n. one who so advocates
• The so-called ERA, or Equal Rights Amendment, for women was supported by egalitarian groups. • Egalitarians supported the civil rights movement of the late 1960s.
elegy (EL i gee) n.
1. a song or poem of praise for the dead; 2. any mournful song or poem
• Gray’s “Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard” is an elegy that laments the loss of ordinary people. • Shelly’s “Adonais” is an elegy mourning the death of John Keats.
elemental (EL im EN til) adj.
1. of or like natural forces; typical of the physical universe; 2. basic and powerful rather than subtle or refined; 3. of any of the four traditional elements (earth, air, fire, and water) traditionally thought to comprise all things
• It is elemental that satellites orbit their planets. • The force of an erupting volcano is elemental in its power. • Hunger is an elemental drive; the urge to be entertained is not.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. basic]
elucidate (il OO si DAYT) vt.
to clear up (especially something abstract); to explain
• Please elucidate on the subject of why you did not come home last night until after midnight. • Mrs. Jones would appreciate your elucidating on Einstein’s theory of relativity so that it is clear to her whether you understand it.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. explain]
emaciate (im AY shee AYT) vt.
to cause to grow excessively thin; to cause to waste away
• Starvation emaciates the body. • People suffering from anorexia emaciate.
[-d, emaciating, emaciation n.] [Syn. thin, waste away
emancipate (im AN si PAYT) vt.
1. to set free from bondage, slavery, serfdom, and the like; 2. to free from control or restraint
• Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation of 1862 did not emancipate the slaves living in the Union, only those in the Confederacy, where he had no power. • At age 18 in most states, a child can be emancipated from his or her parents’ control.
[-d, emancipating, emancipation n.] [Syn. free]
embezzle (em BEZ il) vt.
to steal by fraud; to take money from someone on false pretense and then spend it on oneself
• Several corporate executives spent the late 1990s embezzling their stockholders’ money. • Con men are skilled in the art of embezzling.
[-d, embezzling, -ment, -r n.] [Syn. steal]
emit (ee MIT) vt.
to send out; send forth; give off; utter; discharge
• A transmitter’s antenna emits some kind of waves. • A speaker stands before an audience and emits words. • Old Faithful emits hot water at regular intervals.
[-ted, -ting] [Syn. discharge]
emollient (im AHL yint) adj.
softening; soothing —n. a substance that has a softening effect when applied to the skin
• Many medicinal preparations have an emollient effect. • Proper skin care requires replacing skin moisture every day by using emollients.
encomium (in KOHM ee uhm) n.
a formal expression of praise; a hymn or eulogy
• “America the Beautiful” is an encomium to the natural beauty of the country. • “Adonais” is Shelly’s encomium to the poet John Keats.
[Syn. tribute]
enigmatic (EN ig MAT ik) adj.
like a seemingly inexplicable matter (enigma); perplexing; baffling
• Lightning must have been very enigmatic to everyone living prior to the eighteenth century. • Traveling faster than the speed of light is the stuff of science fiction but is enigmatic to today’s science.
[-ally adv.] [Syn. obscure]
enunciate (in UHN see AYT) vt.
1. to state in a systematic way; 2. to pronounce words clearly; 3. to announce
• Einstein first enunciated his theory of relativity in 1905. • It is important to enunciate clearly to make your position understood by others. • Bob and Carol enunciated their engagement to each other.
[-d, enuciating] [Syn. utter
enzyme (EN zym) n.
any one of many proteins developed by plants and animals that act as catalysts in certain chemical reactions
• Chlorophyll acts as an enzyme in green plants’ process of photosynthesis. • Pepsin and retsyn are two enzymes that aid in human digestion.
epicure (EP ik yur) n.
a person who has an appreciation of fine food and drink, and enjoys consuming same
• French cuisine has a great appeal to the epicure. • Snails, while a common delicacy in France, are the exclusive domain of the epicure in this country. • Chinese, French, and Italian cuisines are no longer for the enjoyment of American epicures only.
[Syn. gourmet, gastronome
epithet (EP i THET) n.
1. an often derogatory word or phrase used to characterize someone; 2. a descriptive name or title (for example, Alexander the Great)
• Egghead is an epithet for an intellectual person. • In King Ethelred the Unready’s name, “the Unready” is an epithet
equable (EK wib il) adj.
not varying very much; even tempered; serene; not readily upset
• Tropical climates are equable rather than seasonal. • It was strange to see George fly off the handle because he is usually quite equable.
[equably adv., equability n.] [Syn. steady]
equivalence (ik WIV il ens) n.
equality of value, meaning, force, grade, weight, and so on
• The equivalence of 2.54 centimeters and 1 inch is a well-known relationship. • A generic drug has the chemical equivalence of its brand-name cousin at a lower price.
equivocal (ik WIV ik il) adj.
1. capable of being interpreted in more than one way; purposely vague; obscure; 2. uncertain; doubtful; 3. suspicious; questionable conduct
• Almost every character in Lewis Carroll’s books is equivocal, except for Alice. • The origin of the hamburger is equivocal, but everyone attributes the origin of the ice-cream cone to the St. Louis World’s Fair. • The shopkeeper called the police when he considered the behavior of the person hanging around outside his shop to be equivocal.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. obscure]
equivocate (ik WIV ik AYT) vi.
mislead; hedge; deceive; be deliberately vague or ambiguous
• Part of a defense attorney’s job is to equivocate, so as to leave the jury with a reasonable doubt. • When the police are interviewing a suspect and he or she equivocates, they can be pretty sure they’ve found the right person.
[-d, equivocating] [Syn. lie]
erode (ir OHD) vt.
1. to wear away; eat into; disintegrate; 2. to cause to wear away; 3. to form by gradually wearing away
• Anything that is continually rubbed against erodes. • Rain has eroded the rocks of Bryce Canyon, Utah, to make all the beautiful, statuesque formations. • The Grand Canyon is the result of rock being eroded over millions of years by the Colorado River.
[-d, eroding] [Syn. wear (away)]
erudition (ER yoo DISH in) n.
learning acquired through scholarship (by reading and study)
• Everything we know about ancient Greek civilization is the result of archaeology and erudition. • Erudition in some form continues throughout life for any intellectually curious person.
[Syn. information
esoterica (ES oh TER ik uh) n.
1. things meant to be understood only by an elite few; 2. confidential things
• The Native American medicine man was responsible for passing down the esoterica of his calling to the next generation. • Every religion has certain persons to whom are entrusted the esoterica of the group.
eulogy (YOO li jee) n.
a speech or writing in praise of a person who has recently died, or a project that has been killed
• It is customary for a eulogy to be given by one or more persons at a funeral service. • Traditionally, any ill traits of the deceased are not mentioned during a eulogy.
[Syn. tribute]
euphemism (YOO fi MIZ im) n.
1. a word or phrase that is less expressive substituted for a more expressive one to lessen its impact (the remains rather than the corpse); 2. the use of such a word
• The “dearly departed” is a euphemism for the “dead person.” • Many people speak in euphemisms, requiring the listeners to interpret what they are hearing.
[euphemistic adj., euphemistically adv.]
evolve (ee VOLV) vt.
 vi. 1. to develop by gradual change; unfold; 2. to change by evolution
• A winning baseball team evolves as all the right players are assembled and become comfortable playing together. • Modern man is thought to have evolved from earlier species, such as Cro-Magnon man.
[-d, evolving] [Syn. unfold]
excoriate (iks KAW ree ayt) vt.
1. to harshly denounce; 2. to rub off the skin of; to abrade; to flay
• Mr. Brown excoriated his class for having misbehaved on the class trip. • Jack excoriated his right elbow when he slid into second base.
[-d, excoriating, excoriation n.
exculpate (EKS kil PAYT) vt.
to prove blameless; to declare guiltless
• The fact that Inez was shown to have been out of town caused the judge to exculpate her in the case of the missing bananas. • Mark was exculpated of the charges against him.
[-d, exculpating, exculpation n.] [Syn. to clear (of blame)]
exigent (EKS i jint) adj.
1. needing immediate looking into; urgent; critical; 2. needing more than reasonable attention; demanding
• It is exigent that Diane return the poorly fitting blouse before the time allowed expires. • As Melissa found out, raising three small children at the same time is an exigent task.
[-ly adv., exigency n.] [Syn. urgent]
extant (EKS tint) adj.
still existing; not lost or destroyed; not extinct
• Some are hopeful that finding Nessie, the so-called Loch Ness monster, will prove sea monsters extant. • The Cascade Mountains of Washington contain many extant volcanoes that are, for the most part, dormant.
[-ly adv.
extraneous (eks TRAY nee is) adj.
1. not pertinent or relevant; 2. coming from the outside; 3. not properly or truly belonging
• When discussing whether something is or is not the right thing to do, the amount you’re willing to pay to have it done is extraneous. • The phases of the moon are extraneous to the seasons on earth. • When playing Chopin’s piano sonatas, the presence of a flute player is extraneous.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. extrinsic]
extricable (EKS tri ki bil) adj.
able to get out from; able to separate from; capable of being disentangled
• An egg yolk is easily extricable from a shelled egg—especially after the egg has been hard-boiled. • The painter’s having failed to deliver on his part of the contract made Harvey extricable from it. • A single rubber band is usually quite extricable from a ball of rubber bands.
[extricably adv.] [Syn. escapable]
extrovert (EKS tra VOERT) n.
an outgoing person; one who directs her attention away from herself and toward others
• Francesco is quite an extrovert for a six-year-old and spends much of his time thinking up ways to get those around him to laugh. • Extroverts are generally a good deal more animated than introverts—their opposites.
[extroversion n.] [Syn. outgoing]
facetious (fis EE shis) adj.
joking or trying to be funny (especially at an inappropriate time)
• Being facetious is practically a full-time job for a punster. • Vicki told Bill, “Don’t think I’m being facetious when I tell you you’re my best friend, but I am.”
[-ly adv.] [Syn. witty]
facilitate (fa SIL i TAYT) vt.
to make possible, or to make it easier to do something
• The hardened tips on shoelaces greatly facilitate lacing shoes and boots. • Ramps being installed on most street corners facilitate getting on and off sidewalks for the handicapped.
[-d, facilitating] [Syn. ease]
faction (FAK shin) n.
inside a larger organization, a group of people smaller than the whole working toward or aiming at one specific goal; partisan
• When the school PTA met, one faction favored holding a Christmas party, while another was dead set against it. • Because it is a part of a larger whole, one can properly say that a faction is a fraction of a group.
feckless (FEK lis) adj.
1. weak; ineffective; 2. careless; irresponsible
• Mary was feckless about bringing her umbrella to work, and she paid for it when the skies opened up.• Allowing a five-year-old to walk alone near a busy street can only be described as feckless.
[-ly adv.]
felon (FEL in) n.
a person guilty of a major crime (guilty of a felony, rather than a misdemeanor); a criminal
• Petty larceny is a misdemeanor, while grand larceny is a felony, and one who commits it is a felon. • The person who wrote the sentence “The boy felon his head” is not necessarily a felon. • Most prison residents in the United States are felons.
fidelity (fi DEL i tee) n.
1. faithfulness to one’s obligations; loyalty; 2. faithful to the story, the truth, the actual sound, and so on
• When two people get married, each should expect the full fidelity of the other. • High fidelity is so named because it tries to be faithful to the sound of the concert hall. • When one reads a news story, it is only right to expect the reporter to show fidelity to the actual facts.
[Syn. allegiance
finesse (fin ES) n.
1. the ability to handle delicate situations with skill; 2. cunning; artfulness; craftiness —vt. 1. to bypass or evade an issue; 2. to manage or deal with using finesse
• Walter handled the customer’s complaint with finesse. • Martha tried to finesse her way around the requirement that she had to have a driving permit before she could get her license. • It is a common play in a game of bridge for a player to finesse a lower value card past an opponent without losing it.
[-d, finessing]
fission (FISH in) n.
a splitting apart; division into two or more parts
• Some cells reproduce asexually by binary fission. • A fission of the nucleus of an atom releases considerable energy and is the principle on which the atomic bomb was based.
[-able adj.]
fissure (FISH yer) n.
1. a long, narrow, deep crack; 2. a dividing or breaking into parts
• Fissures in mountains have been responsible for swallowing up more than one climber. • Glaciers usually fracture along fissures, causing huge icebergs to break off.
[Syn. crack]
fixate (FIX ayt) vt.
 vi. 1. to focus (the eyes) on an object; 2. to form a persistent attachment to some person or object
• Someone who cannot fixate on an object that is distant is said to be myopic, or nearsighted. • When one person fixates on another person so that the attachment becomes excessive, it is time for a psychological expert to be brought in for assistance.
[-d, fixating]
flag (FLAG) vi.
1. to become limp; droop; 2. to lose energy; wane; grow weak or tired
• When a flower does not get enough water, it tends to flag but perks up again if watered in time. • After two hours watching the races, Ida’s interest began to flag.
[-ged, -ging]
flaw (FLAW) n.
1. a blemish or defect that spoils something’s appearance; 2. a defect, fault, or error —vi., vt. to make faulty
• The dents in the fender were flaws in the automobile’s appearance. • A diamond that does not contain a flaw is a very rare (read that expensive) thing. • Rubbed off patches of gold finish flawed the watchband’s appearance.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. defect
flora (FLOR uh) n.
the plants of a region, as distinguished from the animal life (fauna)
• The flora of the tropics are varied and colorful. • The further north one goes, the more bountiful the varieties of flora and fauna become, as long as you are south of the equator.
flourish (FLOER ish) vi.
to grow vigorously; succeed; thrive; prosper —vt. to wave a sword, hand, or hat in the air as a mark of; brandish —n. a musical fanfare
• Democracy, which had flourished for the citizens of ancient Athens, essentially disappeared until the end of the eighteeth century. • The actor bowed and flourished his hat in acknowledgement of the audience’s applause. • Each time the president speaks at a formal event, a trumpet flourish precedes his appearance; interestingly that piece is known as “Ruffles and Flourishes.”
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. prosper]
fluctuate (FLUHK tyoo ayt) vi.
1. to move back and forth or up and down; 2. to be continuously varying —vt. to cause to fluctuate
• The ocean’s tides fluctuate with the effects from the pull of the sun and the moon. • The heights of the threads in a shag rug fluctuate, often in a discernible pattern. • Jan fluctuates the size of her weekly bank deposit according to the amount of tips she receives that week.
[-d, fluctuating] [Syn. vary]
flux (FLUHKS) n.
1. a continuous moving or change; 2. a material that keeps metals from oxidizing when they are soldered
• Fashion is always in a state of flux. • Public opinion goes through flux along with the economy. • Before soldering copper pipes together, both surfaces to be joined must be roughed up and coated with flux paste.
foible (FOY bil) n.
a small weakness of character; a small frailty
• Being easily tempted is a foible many of us share. • One of Alessandra’s foibles is an inability to resist fresh whipped cream.
[Syn. fault]
foment (foh MENT) vt.
to stir up (trouble); incite (to riot); instigate
• One of President Eisenhower’s favorite words was foment as he talked of North Korea’s fomenting a crisis by invading South Korea. • It has been often debated whether the riots at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago were fomented by the demonstrators or by the Chicago Police Department.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. incite
foreclosure (fawr KLOH zhyoer) n.
the legal procedure for a mortgager to gain possession of a property when the mortgagee has failed to keep up payments so that the property can be sold to cover the former’s expenses
• The bank’s attorneys took foreclosure action because the borrower was in arrears on the monthly payments. • Foreclosure auctions, in which the foreclosed-on properties are sold to repay the mortgage holder, can be a source of real estate bargains.
[(to) foreclose vi., vt.]
foreignness (FAWR in nes) n.
the quality of not naturally belonging; having the quality of being an outsider; strangeness
• Invading microbes are usually attacked by the body’s defenses when their foreignness is recognized. • Westerners’ ears have difficulty with the foreignness of Asian music.
[Syn. extrinsicness]
forestall (for STAWL) vt.
1. to prevent by performing some action in advance; 2. to hinder; obstruct
• Paying the overdue mortgage forestalled the bank’s foreclosing on Ms. Green’s home. • Mr. Black obtained a restraining order to forestall his neighbor’s cutting down the cherry tree.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. prevent
formidable (FAWR mid uh bil) adj.
1. causing fear; 2. difficult to overcome; 3. impressive
• Gerald’s threat to sue was a formidable one as far as Bob was concerned. • Audrey found the obstacle course a formidable barrier. • Vance’s performance on the SAT was formidable indeed.
[formidably adv.]
fortuitous (for TOO i tus) adj.
1. occurring by accident; by chance; 2. lucky; by good fortune
• Bill’s running into his future employer at the ballpark was just a fortuitous occurrence. • How fortuitous that Hillary won the state lottery.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. accidental]
forum (FOR uhm) n.
1. the ancient Roman open marketplace; 2. a court of law; tribunal; 3. an opportunity for open discussion
• The Roman forum was a marketplace in which ideas as well as goods were exchanged. • A court of law serves as a forum in which justice is dispensed (not to be confused with “dispensed with”). • Often a televised debate serves as a forum for political candidates to present their ideas and to discuss their plans should they be elected.
fracas (FRAY kuhs) n.
a noisy fight or loud quarrel; a brawl
• The police had to come break up the fracas at the tavern last night. • When Mr. and Mrs. Unger get into one of their frequent shouting contests, the fracas disturbs the whole neighborhood.
frieze (FREEZ) n.
a series of decorations, painted or sculpted, usually in a horizontal band
• A series of high-relief sculptures forms a frieze decorating a fireplace mantle at the Vanderbilt home.
functionary (FUNK shin er ee) n.
a person who performs a certain function, especially an official
• A server in the cafeteria is a functionary, as is a janitor. • The keeper of public records is a functionary, whose function is, obviously, keeping public records.
fusion (FYOO zhin) n.
1. joining by melting together; fusing; 2. a joining as if by melting together (for example, two factions of a political party); 3. nuclear fusion
• Welding is a practical form of fusion and is used to join the frames of cars and aircraft to their skins. • In times of war, it has been customary for a fusion of the political parties to occur so that the nation acts as one. • It is the aim of scientists to use nuclear energy formed by fusion (the principle of the H-bomb) for peaceful purposes
gainsay (gayn SAY or GAYN say) vt.
1. to deny; 2. to contradict; 3. to oppose
• Mr. Jones gainsays any responsibility for the damage to Miss Wright’s automobile. • “I hate to gainsay your story,” Paul said, “but it didn’t happen like that. • The loyal opposition gainsayed every attempt to get the new budget bill through Parliament.
[gainsaid, -ing] [Syn. deny]
garrison (GAR is uhn) n.
1. troops stationed in a fort; 2. the entire fortified place including troops and weapons —vt. to station troops in a place for its defense
• The garrison at Fort McHenry withstood bombardment by the British during the War of 1812 while Francis Scott Key wrote the “Star-Spangled Banner.” • During the Vietnam War, garrisons were established at so-called strategic hamlets. • During the Revolutionary War, the British garrisoned troops in the homes of the colonists.
garrulous (GAER yoo lis) adj.
talkative; talking too much about generally insignificant things
• Teenaged girls tend to be more garrulous than their male counterparts. • Most company sales meetings are dominated by garrulous persons who love to hear themselves speak.
[-ness n.] [Syn. loquacious, talkative]
genre (ZHAHN ruh) n.
a kind or type, like literature, music, works of art, and so on —adj. designating a class of film, book, or the like by its subject matter—for example, science fiction, comedy
• Henry James was an artist of the literary genre. • The Star Wars trilogy gave birth to the genre of big-budget sci-fi films.
geyser (GY zoer) n.
a hot spring from which sprays of steam and or boiling water gush into the air at intervals of time
• Old Faithful in Yellowstone Park is probably the best-known geyser in the world. • Giant, Grotto, Fountain, Castle, and Crested Pool are some other geysers in Yellowstone.
gist (JIST) n.
the main point or essence of an argument, article, and so on
• The gist of the thing is the crux of the matter, and that just about says it all. • Frank did not understand everything the lecturer was saying about calculating the area under a curve, but he did get the gist of it. • Take two hydrogen molecules and one oxygen molecule, and you have the gist of water.
[Syn. essence
gladiator (GLA dee AYT oer) n.
1. any person involved in a public conflict or fight; 2. a swordsman of ancient Rome who fought for the entertainment of the public (not necessarily voluntarily)
• Boxers are often referred to as gloved gladiators of the ring. • The more traditional image of a gladiator is of a man in shorts and leather armor, carrying a shield in one hand and a broad sword in the other.
gouge (GOWJ) vt.
1. to scoop out; dig out; 2. to overcharge; cheat out of money —n. a curved chisel used in woodworking
• Many native people have gouged out logs to make dugout canoes—primitive water transports. • When that restaurant charged $20 for the $7 bottle of wine, they were price gouging, and I wouldn’t patronize that place again if I were you.
[-d, gouging]
gregarious (gri GAR ee uhs) adj.
1. living in herds or flocks; 2. enjoying the company of others; sociable
• Sheep are gregarious animals and never travel alone if they can help it. • Some dogs are more gregarious than others. • If you’re the type of person who enjoys partying, the odds are favorable that you’re gregarious.
gristle (GRIS il) n.
cartilage, especially cartilage found in prepared meat
• Karen hates biting into a piece of chicken and finding gristle. • It’s not always easy to remove the gristle from a roast before cooking it. • If you really can’t stand gristle, stick to fish.
gust (GUHST) n.
1. a sudden burst of wind; 2. a sudden burst of rain, smoke, fire, and so on; 3. an explosion of laughter or rage
• A gust of wind blew Jake’s hat off. • Emily’s face was scorched by the sudden gust of heat from the burning boat at the amusement park. • A gust of laughter issued forth from the comedian’s audience.
[Syn. wind]
hackneyed (HAK need) adj.
made trite (meaningless) by overuse
• Hackneyed phrases are ones that have been so overused that they have become meaningless, like “a stitch in time saves nine.” • “Right as rain” and “snug as a bug in a rug” are hackneyed expressions.
[Syn. trite]
hamper (HAEM poer) vt.
to hinder or impede —n. a covered basket used for laundry, picnics, or whatever
• Having to slog through knee-deep water certainly hampers your getting to work on time. • The detour hampered Blossom from making her scheduled doctor’s appointment on time. • June packed a picnic lunch in a wicker hamper.
[-ed, -ing
hapless (HAP lis) adj.
unlucky; unfortunate; prone to mishap
• Jim was so hapless that he managed to lose five car keys in one month. • Hapless Harriet was left at the altar by three consecutive fiancés.
[-ly adv.
harbinger (HAHR bin joer) n.
a person or thing that comes before someone or something else to announce the arrival
• The swallows returning to Capistrano is one of the harbingers of spring. • The geese flying south is a harbinger of the weather’s turning cold. • The shrill sounding of the Klaxon on a submarine is the harbinger of the ship’s diving.
[Syn. herald]
harrow (HAR oh) vt.
to torment; vex; cause mental distress
• It harrowed Connie that her rival had gotten the position she had wanted. • Studying for the SAT test was a harrowing experience for Fred because so much depended on his doing well.
[-ed, -ing
haughty (HAW tee) adj.
having or showing great pride in oneself and disdain for others
• Two of King Lear’s daughters were very haughty, and it was not until it was too late that he came to appreciate Cordelia. • Politicians never act haughty in public for fear that they’ll never be elected again. • A haughty person is a snooty person.
[haughtily adv.] [Syn. arrogant]
herbivore (ER bi VAWR) n.
plant eater; an animal that eats only plants, as distinguished from a meat-eating carnivore and an omnivore (an animal that eats both plants and meat)
• The largest dinosaurs that ever lived were herbivores. • There must be more herbivores than carnivores; think about it.
[herbivorous adj.]
heterogeneous (HET oer oh GEE nee uhs) adj.
made up of unrelated or dissimilar parts; varied; miscellaneous
• The population of the United States is probably more heterogeneous than any other country’s. • Considerably less heterogeneous is the population of Japan. • You’ll find heterogeneous colors in a bag of jelly beans.
hew (HYOO) vt.
1. to chop or cut with an ax or knife; 2. to shape something by chopping pieces away with an ax or knife
• Marcia often hews trees to cut up and use for firewood. • Native Americans hewed totem poles from tree trunks. • Many native cultures make hewed pipes and knife handles from wood, bone, and ivory.
[-ed, -ing, -n adj., -er n.] [Syn. hack]
hieroglyphic (HY ruh GLIF ik) n.
1. ancient Egyptian picture writing; 2. any picture writing —adj. illegible writing
• The Rosetta stone made it possible to translate Egyptian hieroglyphics. • Hieroglyphics predate the invention of alphabets. • Many a teacher has told me that I have hieroglyphic writing and need to work on my penmanship.
hormone (HAWR mohn) n.
1. a substance (secretion) formed in one organ of the body to cause some kind of action in another part of the body; 2. such a preparation produced artificially
• Adrenaline is a synthetic version of the hormone epinephrine, which is secreted by the adrenal glands. • Hormones from the pituitary gland govern our growth rate
hypothetical (HY pi THE tik il) adj.
supposing or presuming something although it is unproven
• “What would you do if you were king of the world?” is a hypothetical question because we feel safe in assuming that you are not. • If you ever imagined what type of animal you would be if you could be an animal, you’ve had hypothetical musings.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. theoretical
iconoclast (y KON uh KLAST) n.
someone who attacks and seeks to destroy widely accepted ideas, beliefs, and so on
• Our country’s founders could be called iconoclasts for attacking the idea of monarchy. • To evolutionists, creationists can seem to be iconoclasts who seek to destroy the theories of evolution; the reverse is seen by the creationists.
[-ic adj., -ically adv.]
idyll (Y dil) n.
1. a narrative poem, like a short epic; 2. a pastoral poem or prose work; a work describing a picturesque country scene
• Tennyson’s “Idylls of the King” falls into the first category as a short epictype poem. • Beethoven’s “Pastoral Symphony” (No. 6) could be called an idyll expressed in music.
[-ic adj., -ically adv.]
igneous (IG nee uhs) adj.
fiery; formed by heat, especially formed by volcanic action
• Granite is an igneous rock. • Basalt is another igneous rock that is formed in sheets. • Marble is not igneous but is a metamorphic rock that began as limestone and had its form changed by volcanic heat.
immaculate (im MAK yoo lit) adj.
1. perfectly clean; unsoiled; 2. without flaw; perfectly correct; 3. pure
• The living room carpet looked immaculate. • Immaculate diamonds are very rare and very expensive. • Martha’s behavior at the coming-out party was immaculate.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. unflawed]
impede (im PEED) vt.
1. hinder, block, or delay; 2. to act as an obstacle
• Eating peas by balancing them one at a time on a knife tends to impede the progress of dinner. • An open drawbridge might impede one’s access to the castle.
[-d, impeding, impediment n.] [Syn. hinder]
impenetrability (im PEN i truh BIL i tee) n.
1. something that cannot be passed through; 2. something that cannot be understood; 3. someone unreceptive to ideas
• In the past, a castle’s wall was built for its impenetrability. • The impenetrability of Germany’s code during World War II proved to be a myth. • Harold’s teachers constantly marvel at the impenetrability of his thick skull
imperious (im PIR ee uhs) adj.
overbearing; domineering; having the qualities of an emperor
• Napoleon was short but had an imperious aura about him. • Often, in times of war, a general needs to be imperious. • Although General George Patton was imperious, General Omar Bradley was anything but.
[-ly adv., -ness n.] [Syn. masterful]
imperturbable (IM poer TOERB i bl) adj.
that cannot be disturbed or excited
• Alice listened to all stories with an imperturbable calmness. • Kevin is very excitable and could never be confused with his imperturbable brother, Robert.
[imperturbably adv.] [Syn. impassive]
impinge (im PINJ) vt.
1. to encroach or make inroads (on the rights or property of others); 2. to touch on or have an effect on (someone or something)
• Mary’s oak tree has begun to impinge on her neighbors’ property and is threatening their roof. • It is not a good idea for a lawyer to make a joke in a courtroom because it impinges on the province of the judge.
[-d, impinging] [Syn. encroach]
implacable (im PLAK i bl) adj.
that cannot be appeased or pacified
• The widow of the soldier was implacable with grief. • When Vic’s car broke down 10 miles after he had left the repair shop, his anger was implacable.
[implacably adv.] [Syn. inflexible]
implausible (im PLAWZ i bl) adj.
seeming unlikely to be true; not believable
• The excuse, “The dog ate my homework,” is at best implausible. • Because Lyle’s fingerprints at the scene of the crime were unmistakable, the police felt his alibi was implausible.
[implausibly adv.] [Syn. unlikely]
implosion (im PLOH zhin) n.
a bursting inward; collapsing inward
• An old-fashioned television picture tube contains a high degree of vacuum, or absence of air and pressure, so when it breaks, there is an implosion. • You might have seen a film of a building being skillfully destroyed by implosion so that it collapses in on itself.
inadvertent (in ad VER tint) adj.
1. unattentive; heedless; 2. accidental; unintentional
• Cathy’s crashing her car into the wall was inadvertent. • Sam is often troubled by an inadvertent urge to scratch his nose.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. unintentional
incessant (in SES int) adj.
never ceasing; seemingly never ending
• The blaring of boom boxes at certain beaches is incessant. • Rebecca’s mom seems to have an incessant need to remind her to watch what she eats.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. continual, constant]
inchoate (in KOH it) adj.
1. not fully formed; disorganized; 2. in the early stages; incipient
• Julio’s term paper is still at the inchoate stage, mostly on index cards. • A six-week-old fetus is inchoate in its development.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. rudimentary
incorrigible (in KAW ri ji bl) adj.
not capable of being corrected, improved, or reformed (due to bad habits or disregard)
• Lance’s incorrigible behavior is going to land him in hot water. • Although her parents have tried again and again to keep Angela from putting on all that makeup, she has remained incorrigible.
[incorrigibly adv.]
incursion (in KOER zhin) n.
1. an unwanted inroad; 2. a sudden brief invasion or attack; raid
• Egyptian aircraft made a brief incursion into Sudanese airspace as they returned from their mission. • Indonesian troops made an incursion into East Timor, seeking to capture a wanted revolutionary.
indefatigable (IN di FAT ig uh bl) adj.
never growing tired; unyielding to fatigue
• The senator’s indefatigable efforts have finally succeeded in passing a bill of rights for rabbits. • The supporters of classifying whipped cream as the all-American treat have been indefatigable in their labors.
[-ly adv.]
indelicate (in DEL i kit) adj.
coarse; crude; improper; gross
• The documentary filmmaker’s reference to the president of the United States was, to say the least, indelicate. • It was indelicate of Henry to keep referring to his ex-wife as the old battle-ax.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. coarse, improper]
infatuate (in FAT yoo AYT) vt.
1. to cause to lose sound judgment; to make foolish; 2. to inspire shallow affection
• The notion of being on the winning side was infatuating to Don and caused him to vote for the change in coaches, with dire results. • Cindy might have completely disagreed with Ned’s position on school prayer were she not infatuated with him.
[-d, infatuating, infatuation n.]
infiltrate (IN fil TRAYT) vt.
1. to pass through weak points in an enemy’s line so as to attack from the flank or rear; 2. to pass into a place stealthily so as to attack from the inside or to seize control; 3. to pass through, as in a filter
• It was the job of the platoon of rangers to infiltrate the enemy’s line to cause havoc in their rear. • The rebels infiltrated the palace guard so as to be in a position to strike when the time was right. • New coffee-brewing machines use gravity, causing the water to infiltrate the grounds and fall into the carafe below.
[-d, infiltrating, infiltration n.
infirm (in FOERM) adj.
1. not strong physically; weak; 2. not strong in one’s position; vacillating; shaky
• Certain physically fit senior citizens resent the fact that the elderly and the infirm are often referred to in the same sentence. • Some congresspersons are infirm in their voting records on civil rights.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. weak]
inimitable (in IM it uh bl) adj.
incapable of being imitated; too good to be copied
• Certain products, which we will not name here, have proven to be inimitable, although many companies have tried. • The late Jack Benny was a comedian who influenced many of the comics of today, but as a total package, he remains inimitable.
[inimitably adv.] [Syn. unequaled]
insectivore (in SEKT iv AWR) n.
any of a number of plants or animals (such as shrews, moles, aardvarks, Venus flytraps, and so on) that feed primarily on insects
• It is believed that the human appendix is a vestige left over from an earlier time when humans were insectivores. • One of the best controllers of insect populations is an insectivore, which has taken an unfair beating in literature, the vampire bat.
insensible (in SEN si bl) adj.
1. lacking in sensation or feeling; unconscious; numb; 2. not recognizing or realizing; unaware
• Perry’s five minutes in the freezing water rendered him insensible to the temperature of the air. • Congresswoman Lorraine’s self-centeredness caused her to be insensible to the wishes of her constituents.
[insensibly adv.]
insincerity (IN sin SER it ee) n.
the quality of being hypocritical; not to be trusted; not meaning what one says
• Howard’s insincerity became evident when Diane accidentally scratched the diamond he had given her with her car key. • When the spider invited the fly to come in and join him for dinner, very few knowledgeable insects would have doubted its insincerity.
insinuate (in SIN yoo ayt) vt.
1. to gradually and artfully work one’s way into; 2. to suggest or imply; to hint
• Joanne wanted the part in the play so much that she continuously insinuated her way into the tryouts until she managed to wangle the role. • Tom’s appearing on the platform at the rally for the senator insinuates his support for her positions.
[-d, insinuating] [Syn. imply, suggest
insufficient (IN suh FISH int) adj.
not enough; inadequate
• You don’t want to write a check if you have insufficient funds in your account. • Never base a conclusion on insufficient information.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. inadequate]
insular (IN su loer) adj.
1. like an island; detached; isolated; 2. narrow minded; illiberal; provincial in outlook
• The residents of Manhattan live on an island, yet their view of the world is far from insular. • One might expect a resident of a small town in Iowa to have an insular view of the world situation, and one would be wrong to think so.
[-ly adv., -ity n.] [Syn. isolated]
insure (in SHUR) vt.
1. to contract to receive monetary compensation for loss of property, life, and so on; 2. to guarantee
• Many states require that automobiles be insured in case one damages someone else’s property. • By taking the 8:00 A.M. train, Clara insures that she will be at work on time.
[-d, insuring
intercede (in teor SEED) vt.
1. to interfere to help work out an agreement; to mediate; 2. to step in to prevent something from happening
• Bob’s mom interceded to work out an agreement between him and his brother over which TV show to watch. • The police interceded to keep a gang war from erupting.
[-d, interceding] [Syn. mediate]
interpolate (in TOER puh layt) vt.
1. to stick something in amongst others (especially one or more words into a text); 2. to estimate an intermediate value in a table by taking an average of the surrounding values
• One must only interpolate a few no’s into a text to totally change its meaning. • To find the value of the sine of 60.5°, interpolate from the sines of 60° and 61°.
[-d, interpolating] [Syn. edit]
intractable (in TRAK tuh bl) adj.
1. difficult to manage; unruly; stubborn; 2. difficult to manipulate, treat, or cure
• David’s cowlick was completely intractable, and no hair tonic or mousse seemed able to help. • The new infection was intractable, resisting most known antibiotics.
[intractably adv.] [Syn. unruly]
intransigent (in TRAN si jint) adj.
1. unreconcilable; 2. refusing to compromise; uncompromising —n. a person who is uncompromising
• The governor was intransigent in his position against having broccoli as the state vegetable. • The swimming coach was intransigent in his insistence on everyone doing 20 laps in the pool before calling it a day. • When it came to doing homework before playing after school, Loren’s mother was an intransigent.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. uncompromising]
intricate (IN trik it) adj.
puzzling because of complicated structure or directions; difficult to follow or understand
• The instructions for assembling the model airplane were extremely intricate. • The intricate gingerbread work on the exterior gives a very distinctive character to Victorian-style houses. • For the beginner, the Japanese game of Go seems simple when, in fact, it is a very intricate game.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. complex]
introspective (in troh SPEK tiv) adj.
looking within one’s self and analyzing one’s inner thoughts and feelings
• Before one commits to a lifetime of doing anything, it is important to be introspective and know one’s own feelings. • An introspective examination never hurt anybody.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. meditative
invective (in VEK tiv) n.
1. an abusive term; insult; curse; 2. strong criticism; violent language
• Using invective when speaking of people never won anybody new friends. • It is not considered appropriate to use invective when traveling in polite circles.
irascible (i RAS i bl) adj.
1. quick tempered; easily angered; 2. showing or resulting from quick temperedness
• Greg is irascible and flies off the handle quite readily. • The broken front door is a by-product of Max’s being irascible.
[irascibly adv.] [Syn. irritable]
isotope (Y suh tohp) n.
any one of two or more elements that share the same atomic number, but have different atomic weights
• Carbon, atomic number 6, has two isotopes, C-12 and C-14, with atomic weights shown by their numbers. • U-235, U-238, and U-239 are three isotopes of uranium.
[isotopic adj.
jamb (JAM) n.
1. a side post or any part of a frame for a window or door; 2. a pillar of ore
• When a door is closed, its front and rear edges are in contact with the jambs. • Some metallic ores are found in jambs.
jocular (JAHK yoo loer) adj.
1. joking; humorous; 2. said as a joke
• It is good to go through life with a jocular outlook on things. • When Jill said you look like a million, she was being jocular.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. witty]
laconic (luh KAH nik) adj.
using few words; brief; to the point
• Calvin Coolidge was a very laconic president, rarely wasting words. • Most people prefer not to be laconic for fear of hurting others’ feelings.
[-ally adv.] [Syn. concise]
lambaste (lam BAYST) vt.
1. to beat soundly; thrash; 2. to scold or denounce
• Killer Kowalski lambasted most of his ring opponents. • Ashley’s mother lambasted her verbally for getting home after curfew.
[-d, lambasting] [Syn. thrash]
laudable (LAW duh bl) adj.
worthy of praise
• Mother Teresa’s work with the poor was very laudable. • The rescue workers did a laudable job saving the miners after the shaft collapsed.
[laudably adv.] [praiseworthy]
laudatory (LAW duh TAW ree) adj.
expressing praise or commendation; eulogistic
• The mayor was laudatory in his evaluation of the fire department’s work. • The president had nothing but laudatory words for the work of the armed forces.
[lauditorily adv.]
ledger (LED joer) n.
1. the book for final entry of credits and debits; 2. a long horizontal board that helps support ceiling or floor joists
• A ledger is a bookeeper’s best friend, if kept properly. • All expenses of a business as well as all money taken in must be entered in a ledger. • Every front porch’s sides and front are supported by ledger boards.
lethargy (LETH er jee) n.
1. sleepiness or drowsiness; 2. lack of energy to an abnormal degree
• A feeling of lethargy overtook Antoine as he neared the end of the long drive. • Often, lethargy is a sign of the onset of an illness.
[lethargic adj., lethargically adv.
lever (LE vir) n.
1. a bar used to pry; 2. a simple machine, consisting of a bar on a pivot (called a fulcrum), used to apply force upward on one end while the other end is pushed downward —vt. to pry something up by the use of a lever
• Archimedes said that if he were given a long enough lever and a fulcrum to rest it on, he could move the world. • Probably the lever most adult Americans are familiar with today is in voting machines and is used to open and close the curtain.
[-ed, -ing, -age n.]
liberal (LIB oer il) adj.
1. freely giving; generous; 2. plentiful; abundant; 3. broadminded; 4. favoring reform; not orthodox
• Children need a liberal amount of love from their parents. • Some people like to put a liberal amount of butter or jelly on an English muffin. • Scandinavian democracies tend to be more liberal than the United States when providing medical benefits. • Martin Luther would have been considered a liberal in his day.
[-ly adv.
lien (LEEN) n.
a claim on someone’s property as security for the payment of a debt or loan
• When a car is purchased on a payment plan, a bank usually has a lien on it until it is payed off. • If a house has a mortgage, you can be certain the bank is holding a lien. • An auto mechanic can get a lien in lieu of unpaid repair bills
limn (LIM) vt.
1. to paint or draw; 2. to describe (paint a picture) in words
• The expression “I’m limning a picture” is not one you hear every day. • A good radio sportscaster limns the action of the game so that listeners feel as if they are there.
[-ed, -ing]
literati (LIT oer AH tee) n.
scholarly or learned persons; men or women of letters
• The literati are likely to have read the works of William Shakespeare. • As a general rule, engineers learn their craft but are not counted among the literati.
lithium (LITH ee uhm) n.
a grayish white metallic chemical element; the lightest metallic element
• One of the latest uses of lithium is in power cells for watches and cameras. • Lithium batteries, which power laptop computers, are quite expensive.
liturgy (LIT oer jee) n.
a prescribed ritual for worship in any religious group
• The service in a church, mosque, or synagogue follows a prescribed liturgy. • Needless to say, the liturgy in every religion is unique to that religion.
lofty (LAWF tee) adj.
1. very high in rank; 2. elevated, like a mountaintop
• The rank of general is a lofty one. • Wanting to be a doctor or other professional is a lofty aspiration. • The loftiest peaks in the world are in the Himalayas.
[loftier, loftiest adj., loftily adv.]
loquacity (loh KWA si tee) n.
talkativeness, especially excessive talkativeness
• Siamese cats are known for their loquacity, even though what they say is not said in words. • A group of hens exhibits loquacity by almost constant clucking.
lucidity (loo SID i tee) n.
1. clarity of mind; 2. the ability to be easily understood; 3. a period of sanity in a mental disorder
• Lucidity should be a requirement for driving a car. • An author’s lucidity governs the reader’s enjoyment of his or her work. • Sometimes those in mental institutions experience periods of lucidity.
lustrous (LUS tris) adj.
shining brightly; glorious
• Polished silver has a lustrous finish. • Gold is lustrous even without being polished because, unlike silver, it doesn’t oxidize.
[-ly adv., -ness n.] [Syn. bright
magnitude (MAG ni tood) adj.
greatness of size, volume, brightness, area, and so on
• The brightness of stars is measured by order of magnitude, with white stars being of the highest order. • Some would argue that the magnitude of one’s IQ is a measure of how much they know rather than their intelligence.
maladroit (MAL uh DROYT) adj.
clumsy; inept; klutzy
• A maladroit person should not be employed as a waiter or waitress. • It is very unusual to find a maladroit cat, but Karen has had two of them.
[-ly adv., -ness n.] [Syn. awkward]
mammal (MAM uhl) n.
any of a class of warm-blooded vertebrates, most have hair and all are able to feed their young with milk secreted by the female’s mammary glands
• All animals with hair are mammals. • If an animal has feathers or scales, it is not a mammal. • Whales and dolphins are aquatic mammals.
manipulate (muh NIP yoo layt) vt.
1. to work or operate with the hands; 2. to artfully manage or influence someone in an unfair way; 3. to falsify something for one’s own benefit
• One’s fingers are used to manipulate the keys of a computer keyboard. • Con artists specialize in manipulating people into buying things they don’t need or for more money than they can afford to spend. • Manipulating stock prices for one’s personal gain is a federal crime.
[-d, manipulating, manipulation n.] [Syn. handle]
marginal (MAHR jin il) adj.
1. written in the margin of a page; 2. close to the border or limit, especially a lower limit
• Carol wrote marginal notes in all her textbooks, summarizing the content of the page. • Brad earned just enough money for a marginal existence. • Vinny was diagnosed as a marginal schizophrenic.
[-ly adv.]
meadow (ME doh) n.
1. a piece of grassland, especially one used as a pasture or for growing grass for hay; 2. a low grassland near a river or lake
• The sheep’s in the meadow, the cow’s in the corn. • The horses are out grazing in the meadow. • The meadow grasses are being cut and baled for hay for animal feed over the winter
mediator (MEE dee AY toer) n.
a person who serves as an intermediary for bringing about a peaceful solution to a problem between two or more persons, groups, companies, and so on
• The Taft-Hartley Act calls for strikers to return to work for an 80-day cooling-down period, while mediators try to broker a settlement between workers and management. • A mediator is often used to settle disputes between a company and a dissatisfied customer. • When both sides agree in advance to abide by the mediator’s decision, it is known as binding arbitration.
membrane (MEM brayn) n.
1. a soft, thin, pliable sheet of animal or vegetable tissue that protects an organ, and through which dissolved nutrients can pass; 2. any thin sheet meant to separate or filter
• Every living cell is contained within a membrane. • Modern coffeemakers use a membrane called a filter to hold the coffee grounds and keep them out of your cup.
mercenary (MOER sin ER ee) adj.
1. working exclusively for money, rather than for an ideal; 2. seeking payment —n. 1. a soldier working for pay in the army of another country, or in a paid private military force; 2. a person who will do nearly anything for money
• A mercenary worker welcomes the opportunity to work at a dangerous job for high pay. • High steelworkers are not just mercenary but rather have a knack for working in high places. • Hessian troops were mercenaries who fought for the British during the American Revolutionary War.
mercurial (mer KYUR ee il) adj.
1. of or containing the element mercury; 2. having qualities attributed to the god Mercury—for example, cleverness, shrewdness, eloquence; 3. quick; quick witted; changeable; fleeting
• Fever thermometers used to be mercurial, but now, few are. • A speedy messenger could be called mercurial in the classical sense of the word. • A good businessman should have mercurial qualities.
mettle (MET il) n.
quality of temperament and character, especially high quality; steadfast; reliable; brave
• Dwight Eisenhower exhibited his mettle as a wartime leader in Europe. • Boeing’s B-29 Superfortress showed its mettle as a long-range bomber during the war in the Pacific. • Aluminum has shown its mettle as the metal of choice for building airplanes.
milieu (mil YU) n.
one’s surroundings or environment, especially a cultural or social setting
• Fran thrived in the party milieu. • Kenneth was much more comfortable in an intellectual milieu than he was in a sporting arena. • A symphony orchestra’s milieu is the concert hall
minatory (MIN uh taw ree) adj.
menacing or threatening
• Making minatory remarks to someone can get one into deep trouble. • Tigers are known to make minatory gestures to warn people or other animals to stay back—unless they are hunting.
[minatorily adv.]
mince (MINS) vt.
1. to chop or cut into tiny pieces; 2. to weaken or lessen the force of
• One usually minces parsley before adding it to recipes. • Chefs are able to mince onion with a chef’s knife, but the average home cook is better off using a chopping machine. • The dean prefers not to mince words when pointing out the errors of one of the student’s ways.
[-d, mincing]
misanthrope (MIS in throhp) n.
a person who hates or distrusts everybody else
• Veronica was a misanthrope and was absolutely no fun to be around. • A misanthrope might hate or distrust everyone, but he can be the life of the party
miscreant (MIS cree int) n.
an evildoer; criminal; villain —adj. villainous; evil
• Comic books are filled with superheroes and super miscreants. • Not all miscreants end up in prison, but many people think they should.
[miscreancy n.]
miser (MY zer) n.
a greedy person who hoards money even at the expense of his or her own comfort
• The classical story of a miser is that of King Midas who was granted the ability to turn everything he touched into gold. • Misers are likely to live a shabby life because it is the acquisition of money, rather than the good life, that they crave.
[-ly adv.]
molecular (muh LEK yoo loer) adj.
consisting of, produced by, or being between molecules
• At the molecular level, certain forces hold atoms together. • Molecular study is possible with the electron microscope.
molecule (MAH lik YOOL) n.
1. the smallest particle of an element or compound that exists and still retains the properties of that element or compound; 2. a very small particle
• A molecule of the element oxygen consists of two oxygen atoms and is represented by the symbol O2. • A molecule of water contains three atoms, two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom, and is represented by the symbol H2O. • Flora had a molecule of hope that she’d succeed.
mores (maw RAYZ) n.
traditional behaviors that seem so conducive to the welfare of a group that they come to have the force of law and sometimes even become part of the legal code
• Nomadic tribes live by mores alone, having no formal code of laws. • Often one’s mores can serve to tell one what is right and what is not right.
mortgage (MAWR gidzh) n.
1. the pledging of a property as security for a sum of money; 2. the deed that a mortgager holds —vt. 1. to put an advance claim or liability on; 2. to pledge property by a mortgage
• Most homeowners owe banks, with the person who lives in the home making regular mortgage payments. • When a mortgage has been paid off, the bank delivers the deed to the new homeowner. • Charles mortgaged his future with college loans.
mute (MYOOT) vt.
1. to soften or muffle the sound of a musical instrument; 2. to subdue the intensity of a color —adj. softened; subdued —n. a person who cannot speak
• Some trumpet players used to play their trumpets into a hat to mute the sound. • A muted trumpet does not have the blare of an open-belled one. • Certain artists are known for their use of muted colors.• Pastel colors are muted rather than intense. • A mute is a person without the ability to vocalize sounds.
[-d, muting] [Syn. subdue]
nadir (NAY duhr) n.
1. lowest point; 2. the point on a celestial sphere directly opposite the zenith
• The Watergate scandal was the nadir of Richard Nixon’s career. • The nadir on earth is in the Marianas Trench. • The moon is at its nadir when it is closest to earth.
nascent (NAY sint) adj.
1. beginning to form, start, grow; 2. being born
• Compared to the civilizations of Europe and Asia, that of the United States is nascent. • A young child’s view of the world is nascent and is shaped by parents as well as environment.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. starting]
noisome (NOI suhm) adj.
1. harmful; dangerous to one’s health; 2. having a foul odor
• Cigarette smoking is noisome in every sense of the word. • Playing with explosives can be a very noisome pursuit. • When purchasing fish for dinner, use your nose, and if the fish is noisome, reject it.
[-ly adv.]
nostalgia (naws TAL juh) n.
1. a longing to return to past, happier times; 2. a longing to return home or to familiar things; 3. old things that remind us of the past
• Nostalgia for things past is demonstrated by some of the automobiles that have achieved popularity at the start of the twenty-first century. • There is a big market for old dolls and other nostalgia from the childhood of today’s older adults as they seek to recapture their past. • Nostalgia was captured by Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz with the quote, “There’s no place like home!”
[Syn. homesickness]
nourish (NOER ish) vt.
1. to feed or sustain a plant or animal with food and water; 2. to foster, develop, or promote a feeling, habit, relationship, and so on
• Parents are responsible for nourishing their children physically, emotionally, and—some might add—spiritually. • A friendship needs to be nourished to keep it healthy and thriving. • Celia does not wish to nourish Lou’s belief that they have a future together.
novelistic (NAH vil IS tik) adj.
unique; different; the first of its kind
• Thomas Edison made a fortune from the novelistic idea that sounds could be recorded on a wire. • Truly novelistic ideas should be copyrighted or patented to keep them safe from unscrupulous people.
[-ally adv.] [Syn. unique
obsolete (AHB sil EET) adj.
out of fashion; no longer used; no longer current; discarded
• North American Aviation’s P-51 Mustang is an obsolete fighter plane but was the best fighter of World War II. • The horse and buggy is an obsolete form of transportation. • The dial telephone has been obsolete for years.
[Syn. passé]
occult (uh KULT) adj.
1. secret; mysterious; 2. hidden; 3. having powers beyond human understanding
• Some people believe that practitioners of voodoo have occult powers. • Sarah wanted her study of Tae Kwan Do to stay occult. • Rasputin is an occult figure in Russian history.
[ly adv.] [Syn. esoteric]
odious (OH dee uhs) adj.
deserving or causing hatred, loathing, and so on
• Stalin, when leading the USSR, was guilty of some very odious deeds. • No one has ever been as odious as Adolph Hitler.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. hateful]
odium (OH dee uhm) n.
1. the condition of being hated; 2. hatred, especially toward a person or despised thing; 3. the disgrace caused by hateful action; opprobrium
• The odium of those hurt by the Nazi regime was quite well earned. • Odium toward Saddam Hussein still exists among Iraqis who sought refuge in other countries.
oligarchy (OH li GAHR kee) n.
a form of government in which power belongs to few; an aristocracy
• An oligarchy traditionally consisted of rulers from the aristocratic class of nobles. • The government of Communist China is (as of this writing) an oligarchy, with power in the hands of the Central Committee of the Communist Party.
opaque (oh PAYK) adj.
. incapable of allowing light to pass through, as distinct from transparent or translucent; 2. hard to understand; obscure
• Room-darkening shades are opaque so that light cannot pass through them. • To all but a few people, nuclear physics is an opaque subject.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. obscure]
opprobrium (uh PROH bree uhm) n.
1. the disgrace or infamy brought on by association with a very shameful or reproachful act or event; 2. anything bringing shame or disgrace
• Opprobrium greeted the regime of Benito Mussolini for its invasion of what is now Ethiopia in the 1930s. • Any person or country that infringes on the civil rights of any person or group is deserving of opprobrium
orb (AWRB) n.
1. a sphere or globe; 2. any of the celestial bodies such as the sun, moon, planets, stars; 3. the eyeball
• An orb is round, no matter how you look at it. • As an orb, I’m sure you’ll agree, the earth is nice to have around. • To appreciate that an eyeball is an orb, you’ll have to see one outside of the skull.
overt (oh VOERT) adj.
not hidden; open; apparent; public; manifest; observable
• It is against the law in most states to carry a concealed weapon, but the laws governing the carrying of an overt weapon differ from state to state. • Most parents are very overt in their love for their children.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. open]
parody (PA ruh dee) n.
1. a humorous copy of a literary or musical work, often applied to an inappropriate subject; 2. a weak imitation —vt. 1. to write or perform a parody; 2. to imitate mockingly
• Gulliver’s Travels is a parody of the travel books that were so popular in Jonathan Swift’s day. • Parody is imitation and as such is a form of flattery. • Certain comedians make a living parodying political figures. • Mel Brooks parodies Mary Shelley’s book in the motion picture Young Frankenstein.
[parodied, -ing, parodies pl.] [Syn. caricature]
parse (PARS) vt.
1. to separate a sentence into its parts, identifying and explaining the use of each of those parts and their relationship to each other; 2. to describe the preceding
• In times past, it was customary to parse sentences in English class, using a diagram. • When a sentence is parsed, it is separated into subject, predicate, and all modifying words (associating them with the words they modify).
[-d, parsing] [Syn. analyze]
pastoral (PAS toer il) adj.
1. of shepherds, their work, or their way of life; 2. characteristic of rural life —n. a literary or musical work that deals with rural life, usually in an idealized way
• The pastoral life is the lifestyle of a shepherd. • Traditional pastoral life is quite different from life in today’s rural America. • Beethoven’s Symphony No. 6 is also known as the Pastoral Symphony and depicts country life.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. rural]
patron (PAY truhn) n.
1. a protector or benefactor; 2. one who uses his or her money to sponsor artists or events
• Classical musicians could not earn a living if it weren’t for the support of patrons. • Austrian Prince Esterházy was Haydn’s patron for much of the musician’s adult life.
[Syn. sponsor
peccadillo (PEK uh DIL oh) n.
a minor or slight sin; a small fault or misdeed
• Mark’s roving eye was a peccadillo that Noreen did not care to put up with, so she dumped him. • Treating as a peccadillo a child’s taking a candy bar from a store without paying is as good as encouraging the child to go on to larger crimes.
pedantry (PED in tree) n.
1. petty insistence on exact adherence to minor arbitrary points of learning; 2. ostentatious demonstrations of knowledge
• Mrs. Higgins, true to her pedantry, insists that each of her students learn Lincoln’s “Gettysburg Address” word for word. • Bert, in his pedantry, never missed an opportunity to use a five-syllable word when a two-syllable one would have done the job.
pedestrian (pi DES tree in) adj.
1. walking; done on foot; 2. of or for a walker; 3. lacking interest; ordinary; dull —n. a walker
• Special Walk/Don’t Walk signs are growing more popular for the benefit of pedestrian citizens. • The UN ambassador’s speech was very pedestrian and lulled half its listeners into a daze. • City drivers need to keep an eye out for pedestrians crossing the street.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. ordinary
peripatetic (PER i puh TET ik) adj.
moving about from place to place; itinerant
• Peripatetic movie critics might move from theater to theater and check out the comfort of the seats as well as what’s on the screen. • A nomad lives a peripatetic existence.
[-ally adv.] [Syn. itinerant]
perish (PER ish) vt.
1. to be destroyed or wiped out; 2. to die; disappear
• Many people perished in the floods of 2004. • As it passed over the horizon, the sun perished from view. • Do not perish the thought of adding every one of these words to your vocabulary.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. disappear, die]
perjury (POER joer ee) n.
lying under oath; failing to tell the truth under formal oath (to a court of law)
• Perjury is a crime that is committed more frequently than those who commit it are prosecuted. • Witnesses who refused to say anything in court cannot be accused of perjury.
permeable (POER mee i bl) adj.
capable of being passed through by fluids (liquids and gases)
• Cell membranes are permeable so that dissolved nutrients can pass through them. • The most common permeable item in households today is the coffee filter.
[permeably adv.]
perturb (poer TOERB) vt.
1. to annoy, alarm, or upset; 2. to cause confusion or disorder; unsettle (Imperturbable means not capable of being disturbed.)
• Francesco is perturbed when he thinks someone is hurting an animal. • Many people are perturbed by the sight of blood. • Shouting fire in a crowded theater might perturb the audience enough to cause a riot and so is illegal.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. disturb]
pervade (poer VAYD) vt.
to be prevalent or widespread
• A feeling of relief pervaded the community after hearing the news that the little girl had been rescued from the shaft. • A case of blight pervaded the Irish potato crop at one time and caused widespread famine.
[-d, pervading]
philistine (FIL is teen) adj.
1. uncultured and smugly conventional —n 1. small-town people; locals 2. (P) the name of the ancient people who often fought with the Israelites of biblical times, and among whose number was Goliath
• The diva’s response to a request that she perform a certain number was a philistine, “I sang that yesterday.” • Students in a college town often refer to the townspeople as philistines. • Delilah was the Philistine woman who was responsible for Samson’s haircut
photosynthesis (foh toh SIN thi sis) n.
the chemical process by which a green plant combines water and carbon dioxide in the presence of sunlight to form sugars
• Photosynthesis is the process by which a green plant manufactures its own food. • Chloroplasts contain the green substance, chlorophyll, which must be present for photosynthesis to occur.
placate (PLAY kayt) vt.
to stop from being angry; to appease; pacify
• Hailee needed to be placated after Sebastian ran off with her toy. • Neville Chamberlain’s big mistake was trying to placate Hitler by allowing him to march into Austria.
[-d, placating] [Syn. pacify
placid (PLAS id) adj.
peaceful; undisturbed; tranquil; calm
• The sea was placid following the passage of the violent storm. • A good businessman always keeps a placid demeanor while around customers.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. calm]
plaintive (PLAYN tiv) adj.
sorrowful; mournful; expressing sorrow or melancholy; sad
• Laurie felt very plaintive after the loss of her pet parakeet. • Robbie was plaintive after he struck out, making the final out of the game.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. sad
plethora (PLE thir uh) n.
an overabundance or excess; the state of being too full
• A plethora of suds filled the tub to overflowing. • A plethora of customers tried to get World Series tickets, and most of them had to be turned away.
pluck (PLUHK) n.
courage to meet difficulties or danger; fortitude —vt. to pull out or pick (feathers, hairs, and so on)
• Lieutenant Rigers had the pluck to lead his platoon into battle at the head of the column. • Eugine showed his pluck by continuing to hunt for survivors in 20-foot surf. • Butchers used to pluck chickens by hand, but today a machine does it better.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. fortitude]
plummet (PLUH mit) vi.
to plunge; to fall straight downward
• When the skydiver jumped from the plane, he plummeted some 2,000 feet before his parachute opened. • An airplane’s wings provide lift that keeps it from plummeting to the ground. • A high diver plummets from the board until the water breaks his or her fall.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. plunge]
plutocratic (PLOO toh KRAT ik) adj.
of the wealthy, especially those whose wealth carries with it great power and influence (Plutocracy is government by the wealthy.)
• Many plutocratic families had acquired their wealth by the 1920s. • Among America’s plutocratic family names are Carnegie, Ford, Kennedy, and Rockefeller.
[-ally adv., plutocracy, plutocrat n.]
polarity (puh LAR i tee) adj.
1. having the tendency to align along the lines of the earth’s magnetic field; 2. having a magnetic attraction; 3. the condition of being divided into two opposing groups; 4. the tendency to have a strong positive or negative attitude toward some reference point (like the positive and negative electrodes of a battery)
• The polarity of a magnet can be determined by the way its poles line up when allowed to swing freely. • Magnetic polarity can also be determined by approaching one end with a magnet of known polarity. • Republicans in the House often show their polarity by voting as a block against bills the Democrats support, and vice versa. • In a closed DC circuit, electrons flow from the cathode (the end with negative polarity) toward the anode.
[polarities pl.] [Syn. alignment
polemic (poh LEM ik) adj.
1. of or concerning dispute; controversial; 2. argumentative; disputatious
• Polemic persons often enjoy becoming members of a debating team. • Some of the great polemics of the western plains concerned property borders. • The border polemics usually concerned water rights but occasionally dealt with mineral rights.
[-ally adv.]
poseur (poh ZOER) n.
a person who affects attitudes or manners for the benefit of others; an actor; pretender
• A poseur might deliberately affect the manner of another or might do so naturally. • Impersonators and impressionists are deliberate poseurs. • Sometimes a poseur affects an attitude of concern just for the benefit of a judge or jury.
pottery (PAH toer ee) n.
objects made from clay by a potter; urns, bowls, dishes, and so on made of clay and hardened by heat in a kiln; earthenware
• Some of our best knowledge of ancient civilizations comes from having unearthed their pottery. • Most dishes are made of pottery. • Terra-cotta pottery is commonly used for household plants, although plastic is also frequently used.
[Syn. earthenware]
precipitation (pree SIP i TAY shun) n.
1. rash haste; impetuousness; 2. the bringing about of something suddenly; acceleration; 3. snow, rain, sleet, hail, and so on
• The precipitation of a conflict is rarely a cause to celebrate. • Driving too fast might be the precipitation for a high-speed accident. • In the winter, frozen precipitation might fall from the sky.
[precipitate vt.]
preempt (pree EMPT) vt.
1. to seize before anyone else can; 2. to replace a previously scheduled program (on TV or radio)
• A municipal government can preempt someone’s property for public use. • A news bulletin or presidential address sometimes preempts scheduled programming.
[-ed, -ing
prejudice (PREJ uh dis) vt.
1. to have or show bias; 2. to cause harm by prejudging —n. 1. an opinion or judgment formed before knowing the facts; preconceived idea either favorable or unfavorable; 2. an irrational dislike or hatred, suspicion, or intolerance of a certain race, creed, ethnic group, and so on
• Most children have a prejudice for carrots and cucumbers. • It is wrong to prejudice a jury before they fairly try a case. • One might be prejudiced for or against something. • Racial prejudice has been responsible for many hate crimes in the world and in American history.
[-d, prejudicing] [Syn. partiality]
premeditated (pree MED i TAYT id) adj.
thought out, schemed, or planned beforehand
• First-degree muder is also known as premeditated homicide. • The furnishing of a house should be premeditated, or it could turn out to be a disaster.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. preplanned] presage (PRES ij for n. or v., pree SAYJ or pri SAYJ for v.) n. 1. a sign or a warning of an event in the future; augury; omen; 2. a foreboding —vt. 1. to give warning of; portend; 2. to have a foreboding or presentiment; 3. to predict • Many believe that a comet is a presage of disaster. • Most people have an occasional presage of something to come. • Some people consult psychics to presage their futures. • Nostradamus is credited by some as having presaged many events, including the huge success of this book. [-d, presaging] [Syn. omen
prescience (PREESH uhns) n.
to have an apparent knowledge of events before they occur; foreknowledge
• Prescience is not unlike having a presage, except that it is a complete foreknowledge rather than just a sign. • Admiral Yamamoto is credited with prescience of Japan’s defeat if it attacked America. • Alexander the Great was supposed to have had prescience that he would live a glorious but short life.
[prescient adj., presciently adv.] [Syn. foreknowledge]
pressure (PRESH er) n.
1. a pressing, squeezing, compressing, or being pressed; 2. compelling influence; demanding force; 3. (physics) force per unit of surface area
• Pressure is usually used to squeeze the extra water from a sponge mop. • Automobile salesmen are infamous for pressuring customers to buy right away. • In physics, one foot-pound is the amount of pressure it takes to raise one pound one foot.
prevaricate (pri VAR i kayt) vi.
to equivocate; to evade the truth; lie
• Prevaricating while under oath is a classy definition of perjury. • Sometimes people prevaricate to be polite because nobody asks “How do I look?” expecting to be told “Terrible!”
[-d, prevaricating, prevarication n.] [Syn. lie]
primacy (PRY mi see) n.
1. the state of being first in order, time, rank, and so on; 2. the office or authority of a church primate
• A five-star general has primacy of rank in the U.S. Army. • The winner of a race is the contestant with primacy reaching the finish line. • The number one has primacy among counting numbers.
proliferate (proh LIF er ayt) vt.
1. to reproduce new parts in quick succession; 2. to create or produce in large numbers
• A pair of rabbits tends to proliferate at a very rapid pace. • During a fad, a particular item (such as the Hula Hoop®) proliferates in short order and then, just as suddenly, stops. • The U.S. fighter plane proliferated during the Second World War as a result of the strength of American industry.
[-d, -proliferating]
prolixity (proh LIKS i tee) n.
tending to use more words than are necessary; long-windedness; verbosity
• Cuba’s Fidel Castro has always been known for his prolixity, with an average speech running about four hours. • Brevity is a characteristic of wit; prolixity is not.
[prolix adj., prolixly adv.
propel (pruh PEL) vt.
to push; drive; impel onward
• Jet engines propel most of today’s commercial aircraft. • Propellers propel most boats through the water. (Coincidence? We think not!) • Thomas Edison was propelled to fame by his inventions, including the electric lightbulb.
[-led, -ling] [Syn. push]
propitiate (pruh PISH ee ayt) vt.
to cause to be favorably inclined; to win over; to appease; pacify; regain the goodwill of
• Lincoln planned the Reconstruction to propitiate the people of the former Confederacy. • The clothing store manager gave Gail a partial refund to propitiate her and win her furture business.
[-d, propitiating, propitiatory n.] [Syn. pacify]
protracted (proh TRAK tid) adj.
lengthy; drawn out; extended
• The Civil War, which everyone expected to be brief, lasted for a protracted period of time. • Most new car purchases spread payments over a protracted number of months. • When asked why he had not brought home the groceries, Jack gave his wife, Jill, a protracted response.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. extended]
pundit (PUN dit) n.
a person who professes to have a great deal of learning on a subject; a supposed or self-supposed authority on something
• Before buying golf clubs, it makes sense to consult a golf club pundit. • Readers of consumer magazines believe themselves to be pundits on refrigerators. • Political commentators profess to be pundits on politics.
[Syn. maven]
pungency (PUN jin see) n.
a strong, sharp taste and/or smell; acridness
• Certain peppers, such as the poblano, are noted for their pungency. • The pungency of an onion is enough to bring tears to the eyes of the person slicing it—and not for sentimental reasons.
[pungent adj., pungently adv.] [Syn. acridness
quaff (KWAHF) vt.
to drink deeply with gusto —n. 1. the act of quaffing; 2. the drink that is quaffed
• Quaffing beer while eating pizza is a well-established sport in some households. • Harry quaffed his brew from a frozen mug. • Sally stopped into the tavern for a pint of quaff.
[-ed, -ing]
quiescent (kwee ES int) adj.
quiet and still; inactive
• After hours of standing uncovered, a carbonated drink loses its fizz and becomes quiescent. • A quiescent pond is a good place to look for tadpoles.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. latent]
quixotic (kwik SOT ik) adj.
foolishly idealistic; visionary; impractical
• Tilting at windmills is the ultimate in quixotic behavior. • Some say that draft-card burning is a quixotic act, while others call it heroic.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. impractical]
raconteur (RAK ahn TUR) n.
a person who is very skilled at telling stories
• Aesop was a raconteur whose fables always ended in a moral. • Hans Christian Anderson was a Danish raconteur of great skill.
radiate (RAY dee ayt) vt.
1. to send out rays of heat, light, and so on; 2. to spread out in rays; 3. to branch out from a center as spokes; 4. to spread happiness and good fortune
• In a hot-water or steam heating system, heat radiates outward from a (what else?) radiator. • As light radiates outward from its source, its intensity diminishes. • Spokes radiate outward from the hub of a bicycle wheel. • It’s the job of grandparents to radiate love and presents and to shower them on their grandchildren.
[-d, radiating]
rapacious (ruh PAY shis) adj.
1. using force to conquer; looting; 2. taking all one can get; voracious; 3. predacious
• Genghis Khan’s Golden Horde had a reputation, well deserved or not, for being rapacious. • Lumbermen have been rapacious with the tropical rain forests of South America. • The cross-country railroad builders were rapacious toward the herds of American bison.
[-ly adv.
rationale (RA shuh NAL) n.
1. the fundamental reasons or logical basis for something; 2. a statement of the reasons for something’s being done or having been done
• The rationale for building a bridge is to ford a stream or river. • Paying off the bonds that raised the money to build a bridge or road is the rationale for charging tolls to use it. • A modern recasting of the saying “the ends justify the means” might be “Just do it, whatever it is, and come up with your rationale later.”
reagent (ree AY jint) n.
a chemical substance used to detect the presence of another or to react so as to change one substance to another
• The reagent on a piece of litmus paper turns from blue to red when an acid is present. • Luminol is a reagent that glows when it comes in contact with blood.
recalcitrant (ri KAL si trint) adj.
1. refusing to obey authority, custom, and so on; defiant; 2. hard to handle; difficult —n. a person with the preceding qualities
• Most of today’s criminals started out as yesterday’s recalcitrant children. • Recalcitrant Israelites rebelled against Rome in A.D. 67. • Many a recalcitrant has been sent to the principal’s office.
[-ly adv., recalcitrance n.] [Syn. defiant]
recede (ri SEED) vt.
1. to move back; draw away from; 2. to distance oneself from; 3. to slope backward; 4. to become less; diminish
• Flood waters almost always recede. • Looking out the rear window of a car, you can watch landmarks recede into the distance. • Most men and women do not appreciate being the owners of a receding hairline. • During the Clinton administration, the national debt receded temporarily.
[-d, receding
receptor (ri SEP toer) n.
1. a receiver; 2. a sense organ; a group of nerve endings specializing in receiving impulses
• A radar antenna is both a sender for putting out radio waves and a receptor for receiving the signals when they bounce off something. • The nose contains the receptors for smell, while the taste buds are receptors on the tongue. • Rods and cones are light receptors on the retina of the eye.
[Syn. receiver]
recitation (RES i TAY shin) n.
1. a public speaking of some memorized verse or prose; 2. a gathering at which this occurs
• Memorization and recitation of the works of Homer were the main pillars of a classical Greek education. • Many tickets were sold for tonight’s Keats’ recitation at the Town Hall.
recluse (rik LOOS) n.
one who lives a life of solitude and seclusion by choice
• Howard Hughes chose to spend the last years of his life as a recluse. • A recluse can be considered an antisocial individual.
[reclusive adj., reclusively adv.] [Syn. hermit]
recondite (REK uhn dyt) adj.
very profound; beyond the grasp of a normal human mind; obscure; abstruse
• Rocket science is as recondite as, well, rocket science. • Brain surgery is quite recondite but less so than rocket science.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. abstruse]
redemptive (ri DEMP tiv) adj.
1. serving to redeem or get back, as in trading paper money for silver or gold, or trading stamps; 2. serving to save one’s life or soul by the sacrifice of paying a ransom
• Richard made a redemptive effort with his silver certificates but was told the time for cashing them in for metal had passed. • In the biblical narrative of Abraham’s sacrifice of his son Isaac, God provides a ram as a redemptive substitute for Isaac’s life.
[-ly adv., redemption n.]
refractory (ri FRAK toer ee) adj.
1. hard to handle; stubborn (said about an animal or person); 2. heat resistant; hard to work or melt (said about metal ore); 3. resistant to disease
• A mule is a very refractory animal and must be handled with care. • The iron age came about rather late in history because of the refractory nature of the metal’s ore. • Botanists have worked for decades to produce refractory strains of corn and tomatoes.
[refractorily adv., refractoriness n.]relapse (ri LAPS for v., REE laps for n.) vi. 1. to fall back into bad habits or evil ways; 2. to have a recurrence of a disease one had recovered from or was in the process of recovering from —n. a falling back into • It is easy for seemingly reformed criminals to relapse into their evil ways. • Just when Gloria seemed to be getting better, she relapsed into her illness. • Ralph was expected to return to work shortly, but that was before his relapse. [-d, relapsing]
relentless (ri LENT lis) adj.
1. not easing up or slackening; pitiless; harsh; 2. persistent; unremitting
• Sir Edwin Hillary was relentless in his attempt to be the first westerner to reach Mt. Everest’s peak. • The hurricane’s winds were relentless as they damaged many buildings in the Carolinas.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. pitiless]
reparation (REP oer AY shuhn) n.
1. a making of amends for some wrong or injury; 2. compensation paid by one country to another to make up for having warred against them; 3. repairing of damage
• The embezzler was ordered by the court to pay reparations to the persons he had swindled. • After World War I, Germany was required to pay reparations to her former enemies, which sent her economy into total ruin. • Barney brought his torn trousers to the tailor for reparation.
[Syn. compensation]
repress (ri PRES) vt.
1. to hold down or keep back; restrain; 2. to subdue or put down; 3. to control so strictly as to prevent natural development or expression (as a child)
• It is sometimes difficult to repress a yawn, especially when someone else yawns first. • Stalin repressed almost all his country’s people but especially the minorities. • By repressing a child, one can prevent his or her developing into a healthy individual.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. subdue]
repulse (ri PULS) vt.
1. to repel or drive back; 2. to repel with coldness and lack of courtesy; 3. to disgust and repel; to be disgusting
• The colonel left a rear guard to repulse any attempt to surprise his army from behind. • The new neighbor repulsed any attempt on the part of the older residents to welcome him and his family. • Jennifer was repulsed by the bowl of roasted grasshoppers that Allen placed on the picnic table.
[-d, repulsing] [Syn. repel
resilient (ri ZIL yint) adj.
1. bouncing back from adversity; 2. springing back into shape after having been distorted; 3. recovering strength, spirit, and good humor
• Gary showed that he was resilient by hitting a home run after striking out three consecutive times. • Foam rubber is a very resilient material, and cushions made from it retain their shape after being sat on hundreds of times. • Ursala showed that she was resilient by joking with the paramedics only moments after they pulled her from the rubble of the collapsed building.
[-ly adv., resilience n.] [Syn. elastic
resolve (ri ZOLV) vt.
1. to break up into constituent parts; to analyze; 2. to change; 3. to cause; 4. to show the solution —n. firmness of purpose; determination
• A prism can resolve white light into the colors of a rainbow. • The two sides tried for weeks to resolve their dispute. • Einstein resolved the relationship between energy and matter. • Edward expressed his resolve to find a solution.
[-d, resolving] [Syn. decide]
rhinestone (RYN stohn) n.
a piece of colorless glass cut to look like a diamond
• Rhinestones were first created in Germany’s Rhine Valley. • Since their creation, rhinestones have been popular in costume jewelry.
[Syn. fake gem, glass
rigid (RI jid) adj.
1. not flexible; unbending; stiff; 2. severe; exacting; strict
• Steel beams are rigid, which is why they are used in construction. • Orthodox religions tend to be rigid in their interpretation of the right way to live and worship. • The rules for raising children should be consistent but not really rigid.
[-ly adv., -ity n.] [Syn. unbending]
rivet (RI vit) n.
1. a metal bolt with a head on one end (which is heated and put through holes and then flattened on its straight end by hammering), used to fasten metal girders or plates together; 2. something similar used to reinforce seams on work clothes —vt. 1. to fasten with rivets; 2. to hold or fix (one’s attention, eyes, and so on)
• Rivets are used to fasten steel beams together and to fasten an airplane’s skin to its frame. • Rivets are often used on blue jeans and coveralls. • When parts are riveted together, they can’t be loosened the way they can when screws are used. • Roxane’s eyes were riveted by the sight of the jumbo jet coming in for a landing.
[-ed, -ing]
rudder (RUHD er) n.
1. a flat board fixed to the back of a boat or ship and used to steer; 2. a movable attachment to the vertical stabilizer of an aircraft; 3. a guide or control
• A rudder seems to be a very effective way to steer a boat; it has been on every watercraft except small, rowed boats since ancient times. • An airplane’s rudder is almost always the rearmost part of the craft. • The White House often tries to act as a rudder for public opinion.
ruminate (ROO min ayt) vt.
1. to chew cud, like a cow or other ruminant; 2. to think over; consider; meditate
• Cattle, antelope, deer, buffalo, and giraffes all ruminate. • Jerri ruminated over the job offer made to her by a competing company. • Ian ruminated over which of the three universities’ offers of admission he was going to accept.
[-d, ruminating] [Syn. meditate]
ruthless (ROOTH lis) adj.
having no pity; pitiless; cruel
• Atilla the Hun was ruthless toward his opponents. • Neil used to go out with a girl named Ruth, but since she ruthlessly left him, he’s been Ruthless. • Organized crime is looking for ruthless persons to work as enforcers.
[-ly adv., -ness n.] [Syn. cruel
salutary (SAL yoo TER ee) adj.
1. conducive to or promoting good health; 2. serving a good purpose in some way; beneficial
• Regular exercise has a salutary effect on one’s health. • Over the years, the use of new materials in running shoes has had a salutary effect on the speed of sprinters.
[salutarily adv.] [Syn. beneficial]
schematic (ski MAT ik) n.
a drawing of an architect’s plan (blueprint) or a drawing to show the layout of something, such as electrical wiring
• Schematic diagrams of a car’s wiring are in every automobile’s service manual. • An architect’s version of a schematic is usually drawn in white on a blue background and is known as a blueprint.
scrutiny (SKROO tin ee) n.
1. close examination; close inspection; 2. a long, continuous watch; surveillance
• Legislative bodies should always be under the scrutiny of the electorate. • After extensive scrutiny of the pros and cons, the New Jersey Nets’ new owners decided to move the team to Brooklyn, New York. • For decades, U.S. satellites and spy planes kept the Soviet Union under scrutiny.
sedulous (SEJ oo lis) adj.
1. working steadily and hard; diligent; 2. persistent
• Mack was sedulous in his studies of Elizabethan poetry. • Jeannie was sedulous in making sure that she got the best interest rate available.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. busy]
sermon (SOER min) n.
1. a speech given as instruction on religious subject matter or morality by a clergyman during a religious service; 2. any speech on behavior, especially a long-winded, boring one
• The subject of many a sermon has been that fools rush in where angels fear to tread. • It is not unusual for the giver of a sermon to be referred to as preachy.
sextant (SEKS tint) n.
a navigational instrument used at sea to find the position of a ship by sighting the horizon and a known star
• Navigators have used sextants to guide ships since the second half of the eighteenth century. • The sextant is named for its shape, which is a pie-shaped sixth of a circle.
shard (SHAHRD) n.
1. a broken fragment of pottery or glass; 2. (zoology) a hard covering such as a shell, plate, or scale
• Shards of broken pottery can be packed into the bottom of a flowerpot to provide drainage for plants.• While a shard is the zoological term for a hard shell or scale, it is not often used in this manner. • In ancient Greece, shards of pottery were known as ostra, and if enough people wrote a man’s name on ostra, he was ostracized—made to depart from the city-state.
signatory (SIG nuh TAW ree) n.
a signer; one who signed an agreement, treaty, contract, and so on
• John Hancock was the first signatory of the Declaration of Independence. • A signatory to a contract accepts responsibility for fulfilling that contract.
[signatories pl.] [Syn. endorser]
smelt (SMELT) vt.
1. to heat or fuse ore; to refine; 2. to separate impurities from metal by heating it —n. small silver-colored food fish found in northern lakes and seas
• When tin and copper are smelted together in the proper proportions, bronze is the result. • Steel is a product of smelting, where certain impurities are deliberately added to give the finished product desirable qualities. • I ate some delicious fried smelts with cocktail sauce last night as an appetizer.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. refine]
sobriety (suh BRY i tee) n.
1. the state of being temperate and not overindulging, especially in alcoholic drinks; soberness; 2. seriousness
• If a car is being driven erratically, it might be pulled over and the driver given a sobriety test. • During the Cuban missile crisis of the early 1960s, the entire world recognized the sobriety of the situation.
sordid (SAWR did) adj.
dirty; filthy; wretched; base; ignoble; mean
• Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq was sordid. • Sordid behavior was customary in the cow towns of the Old West, where debauchery was the norm.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. base]
splice (SPLYS) vt.
to join pieces together by weaving or intertwining (as with ropes, wires, and so on)
• In a pigtail splice, the bare ends of two wires are twisted together, and then hot solder is applied. • A Western Union splice is the most elegant as well as the strongest wire splice. • A square knot is a very effective way to splice two ropes together.
[-d, splicing] [Syn. join
spontaneity (SPAHN ti NEE i tee) n.
1. acting spontaneously; 2. doing things on the spur of the moment without external incitement; acting with self-motivation
• By definition, spontaneity is incapable of being planned. • Spontaneity must come from within oneself, and some people have it, while others are afraid of it.
squander (SKWAHN doer) vt.
to waste; to spend or use wastefully
• Norma squandered her money on a CD because she could not wait two days for it to go on sale. • Jimmy Carter’s administration refused to squander billions of dollars on the B-1 bomber program.
[-ed, -ing] [Syn. waste
static (STA tik) adj.
1. at rest; not moving; stationary; 2. the opposite of dynamic —n. 1. an electrical discharge; 2. the noise produced by an electrical discharge
• The leadership of most dictatorships tends to be static because the leader rarely changes. • Static electricity is so named because it does not travel in currents. • Lightning is a giant discharge of static electricity between two clouds or between a cloud and the earth. • Static is an annoyance of AM radio broadcasts but is absent from FM radio.
[-ally adv.] [Syn. stationary]
stimuli (STIM yoo ly) n.
the plural of stimulus; things that incite or cause reactions; incentives
• Mosquito bites are stimuli for scratching (though you shouldn’t). • Special receptors in the nose are affected by the stimuli of odors and cause impulses to be sent to the brain. • Reactions are triggered by stimuli.
[stimulus sing.] [Syn. incentives]
stint (STINT) n.
1. an assigned task or job; 2. an amount of time spent at a certain task
• Gregory’s stint was that of a parachute packer. • Buddy spent an 18-month stint on an army base in Alaska.
stockade (stah KAYD) n.
1. a barricade or fence, made up of vertical stakes driven into the ground, for the purpose of protection; 2. a fort enclosed in similar walls
• Western frontier forts seen in the movies are stockades. • A stockade is also a structure that used to detain prisoners. • The stockade fences of today are not actually stockades because only occasional posts are driven into the ground.
stolid (STAHL id) adj.
showing little or no emotional reaction; impassive
• A stolid expression is essential to being a successful poker player. • One who is stolid all the time is very little fun to be around.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. impassive]
subliminal (suhb LIM in il) adj.
beneath the level of consciousness, especially suggestions to the unconscious meant to evoke or teach certain behavior
• Subliminal suggestions repeated over and over again have long been thought to change someone’s overt behavior. • One of the most insidious uses of such messages is in subliminal advertising, where one’s unconscious is deliberately bombarded in an effort to make that person buy a certain product.
[-ly adv.
substantive (SUB stin tiv or sub STAN tiv) adj.
1. considerable in amount or quantity; 2. having real existence; actual; 3. of or relating to legal rights, as distinguished from procedural matters
• A substantive quantity is the same as a substantial quantity. • For a matter to be substantive it must be actual rather than theoretical, for example, an error of commission rather than one of omission. • A person who has invested money in a company has a substantive interest in the success of that organization.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. actual]
subsume (suhb SOOM) vt.
1. to include within a larger group or class; 2. to demonstrate or show that something is covered by an existing rule or law
• No law is required to allow you the freedom to speak in a public park because that is subsumed by the First Amendment to the Constitution. • If the Pennsylvania state legislature tried to pass a capital punishment law instituting drawing and quartering, any opposing legislator could prove that such a law is subsumed by the Constitution’s prohibition of cruel or unusual punishment.
[-d, subsuming]
summarily (suh MER i lee) adv.
1. promptly and without formality; expeditious; 2. hastily and arbitrarily
• The libel case was dismissed by the court summarily. • Randy summarily jumped to the conclusion that his brother had damaged his car.
[summary adj.] [Syn. expeditiously]
superimpose (SOO poer im POHZ) vt.
to place or lay one thing on top of something else; stack; overlay
• Many striking photographic images have been obtained by superimposing two or more different images. • It is a mistake to superimpose your moral code on somebody else.
[-d, superimposing]
sympathetic (SIM puh THET ik) adj.
1. of, showing, feeling, or expressing sympathy; 2. in agreement with one’s feelings, tastes, and so on; congenial; 3. showing favor, agreement, or approval
• It is never out of style to be sympathetic to another person’s loss. • Mary was sympathetic toward Joseph’s love of red cars. • Tom’s parents were sympathetic to his desire to continue his education in graduate school.
[-ally adv.] [Syn. tender, congenial
tacit (TA sit) adj.
1. implied; unspoken; 2. not expressed openly, but understood
• Tacit reasons are not tangible reasons, and vice versa. • A second baseman and a shortstop have a tacit understanding of who is to cover second base in case of a ground ball. • It is illegal for a politician to accept money in exchange for a political favor, but it’s hard to prove guilt when the agreement is tacit.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. implied]
tangible (TAN ji buhl) adj.
1. that can be touched; 2. real and able to be valued; perceptible; 3. capable of being understood
• Anything that one can touch is tangible. • One’s tangible assets are those whose value can be stated. • If someone is talking but not really saying anything, there is no tangible reason to listen.
[tangibly adv.] [Syn. perceptible]
tarnish (TAHR nish) vt.
1. to dull the lustre of a metal surface; 2. to besmirch someone’s character —n. 1. the dullness or oxidation of metal; discoloration; 2. a blemish; a stain
• Silver tarnishes in air and always looks dull if left unpolished. • Tarnishing someone’s character without valid reason constitutes the crime of libel. • Polishing metal removes tarnish from it.
[-ed, -ing]
taxonomy (tak SAH nuh mee) n.
the science of classifying plants and animals by their likenesses to one another, beginning with the most general relationships and getting more and more specific (The classifications, in order, are kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, species.)
• Taxonomy was first developed by Carolus Linnaeus, a Swedish botanist of the eighteenth century. • Linnaeus’s taxonomy shows humans as genus Homo, and species, sapiens; hence, all humans are Homo sapiens.
[taxonomic adj., taxonomically adv.]
thesis (THEE sis) n.
1. a proposition to be argued or defended; 2. a formal and lengthy research paper, usually for a graduate degree; 3. an unproven premise assumed to be true
• The thesis of Wilma’s argument was that brontosaurus burgers were healthier than tyrannosaurus burgers. • Bart selected as the topic for his thesis the proposition that babies drink more milk than grownups because they don’t know any better. • It is an underlying thesis of geometry that a line is infinite in length.
[theses pl.
tiff (TIF) n.
1. a slight fit of ill humor; a huff; 2. a petty argument or fight; spat
• When Vicki found that her new MP-3 player didn’t work, she had a tiff. • Fred and Ethel had a tiff over where they should go on their vacation.
[Syn. spat]
torpor (TAWR puhr) n.
1. a condition of dormancy; sluggishness; temporary (either partial or total) loss of sensation or motion; stupor; 2. dullness or apathy
• After 24 hours of sleeplessness, torpor is likely to set in. • Torpor is characteristic among those who spent hours before their TVs in the old days watching the political conventions from gavel to gavel.
[Syn. stupor]
tranquil (TRAN kwil) adj.
1. peaceful; serene; calm; free from agitation; 2. quiet and motionless
• The tranquil countryside has been the backdrop to many a violent novel. • The ocean may be violent on a stormy day but tranquil on a calm one. • Try to maintain a tranquil attitude, and you’ll have far less heartburn.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. calm]
transgress (trans GRES) vt.
1. to overstep one’s bounds; 2. to violate the law —vi. to sin
• Running a stop sign is a transgression of traffic law. • A sin is a transgression against God. • Eating pork is a transgression in some religions but perfectly acceptable in others.
[-ed, -ing, -ion n.] [Syn. sin]
transmutation (TRANS myoo TAY shin) n.
1. a changing of one thing into another; 2. (medieval) a changing of lead into gold (believed possible then) by alchemy; 3. (chemistry) a changing of one element into an isotope of itself or another by nuclear bombardment or by decay, for example, changing U239 into U235 or uranium into plutonium
• The transmutation of uranium into plutonium is a by-product of some nuclear reactors. • We now know, through modern chemistry, that the transmutation of lead into gold is impossible. • A caterpillar’s transmutation into a butterfly is known as “metamorphosis.”
[Syn. transformation]
tritium (TRI tee uhm) n.
an isotope of hydrogen with atomic weight 3 and a 12.5-year half-life, used in thermonuclear bombs
• Tritium oxide is often referred to as “heavy water.” • Molecules of tritium are created by bombarding hydrogen atoms with protons in a particle accelerator.
tyro (TY roh) n.
a beginner at learning to do something
• Those just learning to play the game of golf are referred to as tyros. • One can be experienced at something and still do it like a tyro.
[Syn. amateur
unfeigned (uhn FAYND) adj.
not feigned; not made up; genuine; actual; real
• Martha’s disbelief at being found guilty was unfeigned. • Harold’s unfeigned vision problems were questioned by the Selective Service Board. • Mary’s excuse that the dog ate her homework was unfeigned, despite her having deliberately spilled beef gravy on it.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. real]
usury (YOO zhuh ree) n.
1. the lending of money at an excessive or illegally high rate of interest; 2. a high rate of interest
• Usury is prohibited by law. • The interest rates that some credit card companies charge is akin to usury.
[usurious adj., usuriously adv.
vacillate (VAS i LAYT) vt.
1. to waver; to sway back and forth; to fluctuate or oscillate; 2. to waver in attitude; show indecision
• It is not unusual for one’s position on an issue to vacillate as more and better information becomes available. • Homer and Marge often vacillate on where to go for their summer vacation.
[-d, vacillating, vacillation n.] [Syn. fluctuate]
vagrant (VAY grint) n.
a person who wanders around without a regular job, supporting him or herself by begging —adj. living the life of a vagabond; roaming; nomadic
• Vagrants may often be found sleeping on park benches in some of our larger cities. • In some communities, being a vagrant is considered to be a misdemeanor. • “Beachcomber” is a classy description for one living a vagrant existence.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. tramp]
vehement (VEE him int) adj.
1. violent; impetuous; moving with considerable force; 2. characterized by strong feeling or passion; impassioned; fervent
• The vehement winds brought about by Hurricane Charley laid waste to parts of Florida’s Gulf Coast. • Bess was vehement in denying any knowledge of the incident in question.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. fervent]
venal (VEE nil) adj.
1. readily bribable or corruptible; 2. characterized by bribery or corruption
• The judge did not appear to be at all venal, and this was backed up when Don’s under-the-table offer landed Don in jail. • The mayor and the council struck a venal bargain on the award of the contract.
[-ly adv.]
veneer (ven EAR) vt.
1. to cover with a thin layer of more costly material; 2. to cause to have a superficially attractive appearance —n. 1. a thin layer of wood or other material glued as the outer layer over a base material to give an attractive appearance; 2. a superficial appearance of something positive
• It is customary to veneer a piece of wooden furniture with a thin layer of finer wood. • Kitchen counters frequently are veneered with plastic for appearance and washability. • Mahogany and oak veneers are both popular in furniture manufacturing. • Francine has a veneer of culture, despite her lack of formal education
verbosity (ver BAHS i tee) n.
wordiness; long-windedness; having an excess of words
• The professor’s verbosity made it difficult for some of his students to decide what was important and what was not. • Verbosity has been a trait of many politicians, but they wait until after they’re elected to exhibit it.
[Syn. wordiness]
veritable (VER i ti bul) adj.
in effect or practically, although not actually
• Karen had a veritable treasure trove of World’s Fair memorabilia in her attic and basement. • Victor prepared a veritable smorgasbord of meats and cheeses for his guests.
[veritably adv.] [Syn. virtual]
vindictive (vin DIK tiv) adj.
1. seeking revenge; in the spirit of revenge; 2. acting to seek vengeance
• The judge tried not to be vindictive in deciding the felon’s sentence. • Because Sean had suffered defeat at the hands of his opponent once before, he vowed to be vindictive in the rematch.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. vengeful]
virtual (VOER tyoo uhl) adj.
1. being as if, but not actual (for example, virtual reality or a computer’s virtual memory); 2. taking place in cyberspace
• Being able to get bleacher seats at Shea Stadium for a weekday afternoon game is a virtual cinch. • When running a memory-hungry computer program, virtual memory makes temporary use of disk space when enough real memory is unavailable. • E-Bay provides a department-store experience in virtual shopping.
[-ly adv., -ity n.]
viscid (VIS id) adj.
1. having a cohesive, sticky, liquid consistency; viscous; 2. covered by a viscid substance
• Chocolate syrup is a viscid substance. • When Jack picked up the jar and felt the viscid texture on his hand, it took a moment for him to figure out that the honey had leaked.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. viscous]
vituperative (vi TOO per uh tiv) adj.
berating; speaking abusively to or about
• Walter was vituperative in his description of his working conditions and his boss. • When Harold spoke to Maude, he was very angry and did so in a vituperative manner.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. scolding]
wistful (WIST ful) adj.
expressing or showing vague yearnings; longing thoughtfully
• Lloyd was wistful for the days when he didn’t have to work for a living. • Liza had wistful feelings for her childhood home in Iowa.
[-ly adv.] [Syn. yearning
xenophobe (ZEN uh FOHB) n.
one who is fearful of strangers and/or foreigners
• Norm was a xenophobe and kept a high fence around his house to protect him from strangers. • Xenophobes do not normally excel at parties.
[xenophobia n., xenophobic adj., xenophobically adv.]
zenith (ZEE nith) n.
1. the point in the sky that is directly overhead; 2. the highest point; peak
• Getting elected president must be the zenith of any politician’s career. • When it comes to mountains, the zenith of Everest is the tallest in the world.
[Syn. summit]